《經解》 The Different Teachings of the Different Kings

孔子曰：「入其國，其教可知也。其為人也：溫柔敦厚，《詩》教也；疏通知遠，《書》教也；廣博易良，《樂》教也；潔靜精微，《易》教也；恭儉莊敬，《禮》教也；屬辭比事，《春秋》教也。故《詩》之失，愚；《書》之失，誣；《樂》之失，奢；《易》之失，賊；《禮》之失，煩；《春秋》之失，亂。
Confucius said, 'When you enter any state you can know what subjects (its people) have been taught. If they show themselves men who are mild and gentle, sincere and good, they have been taught from the Book of Poetry. If they have a wide comprehension (of things), and know what is remote and old, they have been taught from the Book of History. If they be large-hearted and generous, bland and honest, they have been taught from the Book of Music. If they be pure and still, refined and subtile, they have been taught from the Yi. If they be courteous and modest, grave and respectful, they have been taught from the Book of Rites and Ceremonies. If they suitably adapt their language to the things of which they speak, they have been taught from the Chun Qiu. Hence the failing that may arise in connexion with the study of the Poems is a stupid simplicity; that in connexion. with the History is duplicity; that in connexion with Music is extravagance; that in connexion with the Yi is the violation (of reason); that in connexion with the practice of Rites and Ceremonies is fussiness; and that in connexion with the Chun Qiu is insubordination.

其為人也：溫柔敦厚而不愚，則深於《詩》者也；疏通知遠而不誣，則深於《書》者也；廣博易良而不奢，則深於《樂》者也；潔靜精微而不賊，則深於《易》者也；恭儉莊敬而不煩，則深於《禮》者也；屬辭比事而不亂，則深於《春秋》者也。」
'If they show themselves men who are mild and gentle, sincere and good, and yet free from that simple stupidity, their comprehension of the Book of Poetry is deep. If they have a wide comprehension (of things), and know what is remote and old, and yet are free from duplicity, their understanding of the Book of History is deep. If they are large-hearted and generous, bland and honest, and yet have no tendency to extravagance, their knowledge of Music is deep. If they are pure and still, refined and subtle, and yet do not violate (reason), they have made great attainments in the Yi. If they are courteous and modest, grave and reverent, and yet not fussy, their acquaintance with the Book of Rites and Ceremonies is deep. If they suitably adapt their language to the things of which they speak, and yet have no disposition to be insubordinate, their knowledge of the Chun Qiu is deep.'

天子者，與天地參。故德配天地，兼利萬物，與日月并明，明照四海而不遺微小。其在朝廷，則道仁聖禮義之序；燕處，則聽雅、頌之音；行步，則有環佩之聲；升車，則有鸞和之音。居處有禮，進退有度，百官得其宜，萬事得其序。《詩》云：「淑人君子，其儀不忒。其儀不忒，正是四國。」此之謂也。
The son of Heaven forms a ternion with heaven and earth. Hence, in power of his goodness he is their correlate, and his benefits extend at once to all things. His brilliancy is equal to that of the sun and moon, and enlightens all within the four seas, not excepting anything, however minute and small. In the audiences at his court everything is done according to the orderly procedure of benevolence, wisdom, propriety, and righteousness. At his entertainments he listens to the singing of the Odes of the Kingdom and the Odes of the Temple and Altar. When he walks, there are the notes from his girdle pendant. When he rides in his chariot, there are the harmonious sounds of the bells attached to his horses. When he is in private at ease, there is the observance of the rules of propriety. When he advances or retires, he does so according to rule and measure. All the officers fulfil their duties rightly, and all affairs are carried on with order. It is as described in the Book of Poetry (I, xiv, 3), 'That virtuous man, the princely one, Has nothing wrong in his deportment; He has nothing wrong in his deportment, And thus he rectifies the four quarters of the state.'

發號出令而民說，謂之和；上下相親，謂之仁；民不求其所欲而得之，謂之信；除去天地之害，謂之義。義與信，和與仁，霸王之器也。有治民之意而無其器，則不成。
When (a ruler) issues his notices and gives forth his orders, and the people are pleased, we have what may be called the condition of harmony. When superiors and inferiors love one another, we have the condition of benevolence. When the people get what they desire without seeking for it, we have the condition of confidence. When all things in the operations of heaven and earth that might be injurious are taken out of the way, we have the condition of rightness. Rightness and confidence, harmony and benevolence are the instruments of the presiding chieftain and the king. If anyone wishes to govern the people, and does not employ these instruments, he will not be successful.

禮之於正國也：猶衡之於輕重也，繩墨之於曲直也，規矩之於方圜也。故衡誠縣，不可欺以輕重；繩墨誠陳，不可欺以曲直；規矩誠設，不可欺以方圓；君子審禮，不可誣以奸詐。
In the right government of a state, the Rules of Propriety serve the same purpose as the steelyard in determining what is light and what is heavy; or as the carpenter's line in determining what is crooked and what is straight; or as the circle and square in determining what is square and what is round. Hence, if the weights of the steel-yard be true, there can be no imposition in the matter of weight; if the line be truly applied, there can be no imposition in the evenness of a surface; if the square and compass be truly employed, there can be no imposition in the shape of a figure. When a superior man (conducts, the government of his state) with a discriminating attention to these rules, he cannot be imposed on by traitors and impostors.

是故，隆禮由禮，謂之有方之士；不隆禮、不由禮，謂之無方之民。敬讓之道也。故以奉宗廟則敬，以入朝廷則貴賤有位，以處室家則父子親、兄弟和，以處鄉里則長幼有序。孔子曰：「安上治民，莫善於禮。」此之謂也。
Hence he who has an exalted idea of the rules, and guides his conduct by them, is called by us a mannerly gentleman, and be who has no such exalted idea and does not guide his conduct by the rules, is called by us one of the unmannerly people. These rules (set forth) the way of reverence and courtesy; and therefore when the services in the ancestral temple are performed according to them, there is reverence; when they are observed in the court, the noble and the mean have their proper positions; when the family is regulated by them, there is affection between father and son, and harmony among brothers; and when they are honoured in the country districts and villages, there is the proper order between old and young. There is the verification of what was said by Confucius, 'For giving security to superiors and good government Of the people, there is nothing more excellent than the Rules of Propriety.'

故朝覲之禮，所以明君臣之義也。聘問之禮，所以使諸侯相尊敬也。喪祭之禮，所以明臣子之恩也。鄉飲酒之禮，所以明長幼之序也。昏姻之禮，所以明男女之別也。夫禮，禁亂之所由生，猶坊止水之所自來也。故以舊坊為無所用而壞之者，必有水敗；以舊禮為無所用而去之者，必有亂患。
The ceremonies at the court audiences of the different seasons were intended to illustrate the righteous relations between ruler and subject; those of friendly messages and inquiries, to secure mutual honour and respect between the feudal princes; those of mourning and sacrifice, to illustrate the kindly feelings of ministers and sons; those of social meetings in the country districts, to show the order that should prevail between young and old; and those of marriage, to exhibit the separation that should be maintained between males and females. Those ceremonies prevent the rise of disorder and confusion, and are like the embankments which prevent the overflow of water. He who thinks the old embankments useless and destroys them is sure to suffer from the desolation caused by overflowing water; and he who should consider the old rules of propriety useless and abolish them would be sure to suffer from the calamities of disorder.

故昏姻之禮廢，則夫婦之道苦，而淫辟之罪多矣。鄉飲酒之禮廢，則長幼之序失，而爭鬥之獄繁矣。喪祭之禮廢，則臣子之恩薄，而倍死忘生者眾矣。聘覲之禮廢，則君臣之位失，諸侯之行惡，而倍畔侵陵之敗起矣。
Thus if the ceremonies of marriage were discontinued, the path of husband and wife would be embittered, and there would be many offences of licentiousness and depravity. If the drinking ceremonies at country feasts were discontinued, the order between old and young would be neglected, and quarrelsome litigations would be numerous. If the ceremonies of mourning and sacrifice were discontinued, the kindly feeling of officers and sons would become small; there would be numerous cases in which there was a revolt from the observances due to the dead, and an oblivion of (those due) to the living. If the ceremonies of friendly messages and court attendances were discontinued, the positions of ruler and subject would fall into disuse, the conduct of the feudal princes would be evil, and the ruin wrought by rebellion, encroachment, and oppression would ensue.

故禮之教化也微，其止邪也於未形，使人日徙善遠罪而不自知也。是以先王隆之也。《易》曰：「君子慎始，差若毫厘，繆以千里。」此之謂也。
Therefore the instructive and transforming power of ceremonies is subtile; they stop depravity before it has taken form, causing men daily to move towards what is good, and keep themselves farther apart from guilt, without being themselves conscious of it. It was on this account that the ancient kings set so high a value upon them. This sentiment is found in the words of the Yi, 'The superior man is careful at the commencement; a mistake, then, of a hair's breadth, will lead to an error of a thousand 1i.'

<p>Source: Chinese Text Project <a href="http://ctext.org/liji">http://ctext.org/liji</a>. English translation "Sacred Books of the East, volume 28, part 4: The Li Ki", James Legge, 1885</p>