《燕義》 The Meaning of the Banquet

古者周天子之官，有庶子官。庶子官職諸侯、卿、大夫、士之庶子之卒，掌其戒令，與其教治，別其等，正其位。國有大事，則率國子而致於大子，唯所用之。若有甲兵之事，則授之以車甲，合其卒伍，置其有司，以軍法治之，司馬弗正。凡國之政事，國子存游卒，使之修德學道，春合諸學，秋合諸射，以考其藝而進退之。
Anciently, among the officers of the kings of Zhou, there was one called the shu-dze. He was charged with the care of the sons of the feudal lords, the high dignitaries who were the Great officers, and (other) officers,--the eldest sons who occupied the next place to their fathers. He managed (the issuing) to them of (all) cautions and orders; superintended their instruction in all they had to learn and (the art of self-)government; arranged them in their different classes; and saw that they occupied their correct positions. If there were any grand solemnity (being transacted) in the kingdom, he conducted them-these sons of the state-and placed them under the eldest son, the heir-apparent, who made what use of them he thought fit. If any military operations were being undertaken, he provided for them their carriages and coats of mail, assembled for them the companies of a hundred men and of five men (of which they should have charge), and appointed their inferior officers, thus training them in the art of war - they were not under the jurisdiction of the minister of War. In all (other) governmental business of the state, these sons of it were left free, their fathers' eldest sons, without public occupation, and were made to attend to the cultivation of virtuous ways. In spring, (the shu-dze) assembled them in the college; and in autumn, in the archery (hall), that he might examine into their proficiency, and advanced or degraded them accordingly.

諸侯燕禮之義：君立阼階之東南，南鄉爾卿，大夫皆少進，定位也；君席阼階之上，居主位也；君獨升立席上，西面特立，莫敢適之義也。
The meaning of the ceremony of the banquet at the feudal courts (may be thus described):-The ruler stood on the south-east of (his own) steps on the east, having his face towards the south, fronting the ministers or dignitaries who were nearest to him. They and all the (other) Great officers came forward a little, taking each his proper station. The ruler's mat is placed at the top of the eastern steps - there is the station of the host. The ruler alone goes up and stands on his mat; with his face to the west he stands there by himself - showing that no one presumes to place himself on a par with him.

設賓主，飲酒之禮也；使宰夫為獻主，臣莫敢與君亢禮也；不以公卿為賓，而以大夫為賓，為疑也，明嫌之義也；賓入中庭，君降一等而揖之，禮之也。
Guests and host having been arranged, according to the rules for the ceremony of drinking in the country districts, (the ruler) makes his chief cook act for him in presenting (the cup) - a minister may not presume to take on himself any usage proper to the ruler. None of the (three) kung and no high minister has the place of a guest; but the Great officers are among the guests,-because of the doubts that might arise, and to show the jealousy (which such great men in that position might create). When the guests have entered to the middle of the courtyard, the ruler descends a step and bows to them - thus courteously receiving them.

君舉旅於賓，及君所賜爵，皆降再拜稽首，升成拜，明臣禮也；君答拜之，禮無不答，明君上之禮也。臣下竭力盡能以立功於國，君必報之以爵祿，故臣下皆務竭力盡能以立功，是以國安而君寧。禮無不答，言上之不虛取於下也。上必明正道以道民，民道之而有功，然後取其什一，故上用足而下不匱也；是以上下和親而不相怨也。和寧，禮之用也；此君臣上下之大義也。故曰：燕禮者，所以明君臣之義也。
The ruler sends the cup round among the guests in order; and when he has given a special cup to any, they all descend, and bow twice, laying at the same time their heads to the ground; after which they ascend, and complete their bowing - thus showing the observance due from subjects. The ruler responds to them, for every act of courtesy must be responded to - illustrating the observances due from the ruler and superiors. When ministers and inferiors do their utmost to perform service for the state, the ruler must recompense them with rank and emoluments. Hence all officers and inferiors endeavour with their utmost strength and ability to establish their merit, and thus the state is kept in tranquillity, and the ruler's mind is at rest. (The principle) that every act of courtesy must be responded to, showed that rulers do not receive anything from their inferiors without sufficient ground for doing so. The ruler must illustrate the path of rectitude in his conduct of the people; and when the people follow that path and do good service (for the state), then he may take from them a tenth part (of their revenues). In this way he has enough, and his subjects do not suffer want. Thus harmony and affection prevail between high and low, and they have no mutual dissatisfactions. Such harmony and rest are the result of the ceremonial usages. This is the great idea in the relation between ruler and subject, between high and low - hence it is said that the object of the banquet was to illustrate the idea of justice between ruler and subject.

席，小卿次上卿，大夫次小卿，士、庶子以次就位於下。獻君，君舉旅行酬；而後獻卿，卿舉旅行酬；而後獻大夫，大夫舉旅行酬；而後獻士，士舉旅行酬；而後獻庶子。俎豆、牲體、薦羞，皆有等差，所以明貴賤也。
The mats were arranged so that the dignitaries of smaller rank occupied the place next (in honour) to those of higher; the Great officers, the place next to the lower dignitaries. The officers and sons of concubines (also) took their places below in their regular order. The cup being presented to the ruler, he begins the general pledging, and offers the cup to the high dignitaries. They continue the ceremony, and offer the cup to the Great officers, who offer it in turn to the (other) officers, and these finally offer it to the sons of concubines. The stands and dishes, with the flesh of the animals, and the savoury viands, were all proportioned to the differences of rank in the guests:-and thus the distinction was shown between the noble and the mean.

<p>Source: Chinese Text Project <a href="http://ctext.org/liji">http://ctext.org/liji</a>. English translation "Sacred Books of the East, volume 28, part 4: The Li Ki", James Legge, 1885</p>