《盜跖》 The Robber Zhi

孔子與柳下季為友。柳下季之弟名曰盜跖。盜跖從卒九千人，橫行天下，侵暴諸侯，穴室樞戶，驅人牛馬，取人婦女，貪得忘親，不顧父母兄弟，不祭先祖。所過之邑，大國守城，小國入保，萬民苦之。
The Robber Zhi:	
Confucius was on terms of friendship with Liu-xia Ji, who had a brother named Dao Zhi. This Dao Zhi had 9,000 followers, who marched at their will through the kingdom, assailing and oppressing the different princes. They dug through walls and broke into houses; they drove away people's cattle and horses; they carried off people's wives and daughters. In their greed to get, they forgot the claims of kinship, and paid no regard to their parents and brethren. They did not sacrifice to their ancestors. Wherever they passed through the country, in the larger states the people guarded their city walls, and in the smaller the people took to their strongholds. All were distressed by them.

孔子謂柳下季曰：「夫為人父者，必能詔其子；為人兄者，必能教其弟。若父不能詔其子，兄不能教其弟，則無貴父子兄弟之親矣。今先生，世之才士也，弟為盜跖，為天下害，而弗能教也，丘竊為先生羞之。丘請為先生往說之。」柳下季曰：「先生言『為人父者必能詔其子，為人兄者必能教其弟』，若子不聽父之詔，弟不受兄之教，雖今先生之辯，將奈之何哉？且跖之為人也，心如涌泉，意如飄風，強足以距敵，辯足以飾非，順其心則喜，逆其心則怒，易辱人以言。先生必無往。」
Confucius spoke to Liu-xia Ji, saying, 'Fathers should be able to lay down the law to their sons, and elder to instruct their younger brothers. If they are unable to do so, they do not fulfil the duties of the relationships which they sustain. You, Sir, are one of the most talented officers of the age, and your younger brother is this Robber Zhi. He is a pest in the kingdom, and you are not able to instruct him better; I cannot but be ashamed of you, and I beg to go for you and give him counsel.' Liu-xia Ji replied, 'You say, Sir, that fathers must be able to lay down the law to their sons, and elder to instruct their younger brothers, but if sons will not listen to the orders of their fathers, nor the younger receive the lessons of their elder brothers, though one may have your powers of persuasion, what is to be done? And, moreover, Zhi is a man whose mind is like a gushing fountain, and his will like a whirlwind; he is strong enough to resist all enemies, and clever enough to gloss over his wrong-doings. If you agree with him, he is glad; if you oppose him, he is enraged; and he readily meets men with the language of abuse. You must not go to him.'

孔子不聽，顏回為御，子貢為右，往見盜跖。盜跖乃方休卒徒太山之陽，膾人肝而餔之。孔子下車而前，見謁者曰：「魯人孔丘，聞將軍高義，敬再拜謁者。」謁者入通，盜跖聞之大怒，目如明星，髮上指冠，曰：「此夫魯國之巧偽人孔丘非邪？為我告之：『爾作言造語，妄稱文、武，冠枝木之冠，帶死牛之脅，多辭繆說，不耕而食，不織而衣，搖脣鼓舌，擅生是非，以迷天下之主，使天下學士不反其本，妄作孝弟而儌倖於封侯富貴者也。子之罪大極重，疾走歸！不然，我將以子肝益晝餔之膳。』」
Confucius, however, did not attend to this advice. With Yan Hui as his charioteer, and Zi-gong seated on the right, he went to see Dao Zhi, whom he found with his followers halted on the south of Tai-shan, and mincing men's livers, which he gave them to eat. Confucius alighted from his carriage, and went forward, till he saw the usher, to whom he said, 'I, Kong Qiu of Lu, have heard of the general's lofty righteousness,' bowing twice respectfully to the man as he said so. The usher went in and announced the visitor. But when Dao Zhi heard of the arrival, he flew into a great rage; his eyes became like blazing stars, and his hair rose up and touched his cap. 'Is not this fellow,' said he, 'Kong Qiu, that artful hypocrite of Lu? Tell him from me, "You invent speeches and babble away, appealing without ground to (the examples of) Wen and Wu. The ornaments on your cap are as many as the branches of a tree, and your girdle is (a piece of skin) from the ribs of a dead ox, The more you talk, the more nonsense you utter. You get your food without (the labour of) ploughing, and your clothes without (that of) weaving. You wag your lips and make your tongue a drum-stick. You arbitrarily decide what is right and what is wrong, thereby leading astray the princes throughout the kingdom, and making its learned scholars not occupy their thoughts with their proper business. You recklessly set up your filial piety and fraternal duty, and curry favour with the feudal princes, the wealthy and the noble. Your offence is great; your crime is very heavy. Take yourself off home at once. If you do not do so, I will take your liver, and add it to the provision for to-day's food."'

孔子復通曰：「丘得幸於季，願望履幕下。」謁者復通，盜跖曰：「使來前！」孔子趨而進，避席反走，再拜盜跖。盜跖大怒，兩展其足，案劍瞋目，聲如乳虎，曰：「丘來前！若所言，順吾意則生，逆吾心則死。」
But Confucius sent in another message, saying, 'I enjoy the good will of (your brother) Ji, and I wish and hope to tread the ground beneath your tent.' When the usher had communicated this message, Dao Zhi said, 'Make him come forward.' On this Confucius hastened forwards. Declining to take a mat, he drew hastily back, and bowed twice to Dao Zhi, who in a great rage stretched his legs apart, laid his hand on his sword, and with glaring eyes and a voice like the growl of a nursing tigress, said, 'Come forwards, Zhi. If what you say be in accordance with my mind, you shall live; but, if it be contrary to it, you shall die.'

孔子曰：「丘聞之，凡天下有三德：生而長大，美好無雙，少長貴賤見而皆說之，此上德也；知維天地，能辯諸物，此中德也；勇悍果敢，聚眾率兵，此下德也。凡人有此一德者，足以南面稱孤矣。今將軍兼此三者，身長八尺二寸，面目有光，脣如激丹，齒如齊貝，音中黃鐘，而名曰盜跖，丘竊為將軍恥不取焉。將軍有意聽臣，臣請南使吳、越，北使齊、魯，東使宋、衛，西使晉、楚，使為將軍造大城數百里，立數十萬戶之邑，尊將軍為諸侯，與天下更始，罷兵休卒，收養昆弟，共祭先祖。此聖人才士之行，而天下之願也。」
Confucius replied, 'I have heard that everywhere under the sky there are three (most excellent) qualities. To be naturally tall and large, to be elegant and handsome without a peer, so that young and old, noble and mean, are pleased to look upon him - this is the highest of those qualities. To comprehend both heaven and earth in his wisdom, and to be able to speak eloquently on all subjects - this is the middle one of them. To be brave and courageous, resolute and daring, gathering the multitudes round him, and leading on his troops - this is the lowest of them. Whoever possesses one of these qualities is fit to stand with his face to the south, and style himself a Prince. But you, General, unite in yourself all the three. Your person is eight cubits and two inches in height; there is a brightness about your face and a light in your eyes; your lips look as if stained with vermilion; your teeth are like rows of precious shells; your voice is attuned to the musical tubes, and yet you are named "The Robber Zhi." I am ashamed of you, General, and cannot approve of you. If you are inclined to listen to me, I should like to go as your commissioner to Wu and Yue in the south; to Qi and Lu in the north; to Sung and Wei in the cast; and to Jin and Chu in the west. I will get them to build for you a great city several hundred li in size, to establish under it towns containing several hundred thousands of inhabitants, and honour you there as a feudal lord. The kingdom will see you begin your career afresh; you will cease from your wars and disband your soldiers; you will collect and nourish your brethren, and along with them offer the sacrifices to your ancestors: this will be a course befitting a sage and an officer of ability, and will fulfil the wishes of the whole kingdom.'

盜跖大怒曰：「丘來前！夫可規以利而可諫以言者，皆愚陋恆民之謂耳。今長大美好，人見而悅之者，此吾父母之遺德也。丘雖不吾譽，吾獨不自知邪？且吾聞之：『好面譽人者，亦好背而毀之。』今丘告我以大城眾民，是欲規我以利而恆民畜我也，安可久長也？城之大者，莫大乎天下矣。堯、舜有天下，子孫無置錐之地，湯、武立為天子而後世絕滅，非以其利大故邪？
'Come forward, Qiu,' said Dao Zhi, greatly enraged. 'Those who can be persuaded by considerations of gain, and to whom remonstrances may be addressed with success, are all ignorant, low, and ordinary people. That I am tall and large, elegant and handsome, so that all who see me are pleased with me - this is an effect of the body left me by my parents. Though you were not to praise me for it, do I not know it myself? And I have heard that he who likes to praise men to their face will also like to speak ill of them behind their back. And when you tell me of a great wall and a multitudinous people, this is to try to persuade me by considerations of gain, and to cocker me as one of the ordinary people. But how could such advantages last for long? Of all great cities there is none so great as the whole kingdom, which was possessed by Yao and Shun, while their descendants (now) have not so much territory as would admit an awl. Tang and Wu were both set up as the Sons of Heaven, but in after ages (their posterity) were cut off and extinguished - was not this because the gain of their position was so great a prize?

且吾聞之：古者禽獸多而人少，於是民皆巢居以避之，晝拾橡栗，暮栖木上，故命之曰有巢氏之民。古者民不知衣服，夏多積薪，冬則煬之，故命之曰知生之民。神農之世，臥則居居，起則于于，民知其母，不知其父，與麋鹿共處，耕而食，織而衣，無有相害之心，此至德之隆也。然而黃帝不能致德，與蚩尤戰於涿鹿之野，流血百里。堯、舜作，立群臣，湯放其主，武王殺紂。自是之後，以強陵弱，以眾暴寡。湯、武以來，皆亂人之徒也。
'And moreover I have heard that anciently birds and beasts were numerous, and men were few, so that they lived in nests in order to avoid the animals. In the daytime they gathered acorns and chestnuts, and in the night they roosted on the trees; and on account of this they are called the people of the Nest-builder. Anciently the people did not know the use of clothes. In summer they collected great stores of faggots, and in winter kept themselves warm by means of them; and on account of this they are called the people who knew how to take care of their lives. In the age of Shen Nong, the people lay down in simple innocence, and rose up in quiet security. They knew their mothers, but did not know their fathers. They dwelt along with the elks and deer. They ploughed and ate; they wove and made clothes; they had no idea of injuring one another: this was the grand time of Perfect virtue. Huang-Di, however, was not able to perpetuate this virtuous state. He fought with Chi-you in the wild ofZhuo-lu till the blood flowed over a hundred li. When Yao and Shun arose, they instituted their crowd of ministers. Tang banished his lord. King Wu killed Zhou. Since that time the strong have oppressed the weak, and the many tyrannised over the few. From Tang and Wu downwards, (the rulers) have all been promoters of disorder and confusion.

今子修文、武之道，掌天下之辯，以教後世，縫衣淺帶，矯言偽行，以迷惑天下之主，而欲求富貴焉，盜莫大於子。天下何故不謂子為盜丘而乃謂我為盜跖？子以甘辭說子路而使從之，使子路去其危冠，解其長劍，而受教於子，天下皆曰『孔丘能止暴禁非』。其卒之也，子路欲殺衛君而事不成，身菹於衛東門之上，是子教之不至也。子自謂才士聖人邪！則再逐於魯，削跡於衛，窮於齊，圍於陳、蔡，不容身於天下。子教子路菹此患，上無以為身，下無以為人，子之道豈足貴邪？
'You yourself now cultivate and inculcate the ways of Wen and Wu; you handle whatever subjects are anywhere discussed for the instruction of future ages. With your peculiar robe and narrow girdle, with your deceitful speech and hypocritical conduct, you delude the lords of the different states, and are seeking for riches and honours. There is no greater robber than you are - why does not all the world call you the Robber Zhi, instead of styling me the Robber Zhi? You prevailed by your sweet speeches on Zi-lu, and made him your follower; you made him put away his high cap, lay aside his long sword, and receive your instructions, so that all the world said, "Kong Qiu is able to arrest violence and repress the wrong-doer;" but in the end, when Zi-lu wished to slay the ruler of Wei, and the affair proved unsuccessful, his body was exhibited in pickle over the eastern gate of the capital - so did your teaching of him come to nothing. Do you call yourself a scholar of talent, a sage? Why, you were twice driven out of Lu; you had to run away from Wei; you were reduced to extremity in Qi; you were held in a state of siege between Chen and Cai; there is no resting-place for your person in the kingdom; your instructions brought Zi-lu to pickle. Such have been the misfortunes (attending your course). You have done no good either for yourself or for others - how can your doctrines be worth being thought much of?

世之所高，莫若黃帝，黃帝尚不能全德，而戰涿鹿之野，流血百里。堯不慈，舜不孝，禹偏枯，湯放其主，武王伐紂，文王拘羑里。此六子者，世之所高也，孰論之，皆以利惑其真而強反其情性，其行乃甚可羞也！
'There is no one whom the world exalts so much as it does Huang-Di, and still he was not able to perfect his virtue, but fought in the wilderness of Zhuo-lu, till the blood flowed over a hundred li. Yao was not kind to his son. Shun was not filial. Yu was paralysed on one side. Tang banished his sovereign. King Wu smote Zhou. King Wen was imprisoned in You-li. These are the six men of whom the world thinks the most highly, yet when we accurately consider their history, we see that for the sake of gain they all disallowed their true (nature), and did violence to its proper qualities and tendencies: their conduct cannot be thought of but with deep shame.

世之所謂賢士，伯夷、叔齊，伯夷、叔齊辭孤竹之君，而餓死於首陽之山，骨肉不葬。鮑焦飾行非世，抱木而死。申徒狄諫而不聽，負石自投於河，為魚鱉所食。介子推至忠也，自割其股以食文公，文公後背之，子推怒而去，抱木而燔死。尾生與女子期於梁下，女子不來，水至不去，抱梁柱而死。此六子者，無異於磔犬、流豕、操瓢而乞者，皆離名輕死，不念本養壽命者也。
'Among those whom the world calls men of ability and virtue were (the brothers) Bo-yi and Shu-Qi. They declined the rule of Gu-zhu, and died of starvation on the hill of Shou-yang, leaving their bones and flesh unburied. Bao Qiao vaunted his conduct, and condemned the world, but he died with his arms round a tree. When Shen-tu Di's remonstrances were not listened to, he fastened a stone on his back, and threw himself into the He, where he was eaten by the fishes and turtles. Jie Zi-tui was the most devoted (of followers), and cut a piece from his thigh as food for duke Wen. But when the duke afterwards overlooked him (in his distribution of favours), he was angry, and went away, and was burned to death with a tree in his arms. Wei Sheng had made an appointment with a girl to meet him under a bridge; but when she did not come, and the water rose around him, he would not go away, and died with his arms round one of the pillars. (The deaths of) these four men were not different from those of the dog that is torn in pieces, the pig that is borne away by a current, or the beggar (drowned in a ditch) with his alms-gourd in his hand. They were all caught as in a net by their (desire for) fame, not caring to nourish their life to its end, as they were bound to do.

世之所謂忠臣者，莫若王子比干、伍子胥，子胥沈江，比干剖心。此二子者，世謂忠臣也，然卒為天下笑。自上觀之，至於子胥、比干，皆不足貴也。
'Among those whom the world calls faithful ministers there have been none like the prince Bi-gan and Wu Zi-xu. But Zi-xu's (dead) body was cast into the Jiang, and the heart of Bi-gan was cut out. These two were what the world calls loyal ministers, but the end has been that everybody laughs at them. Looking at all the above cases, down to those of Zi-xu and Bi-gan, there is not one worthy to be honoured.

丘之所以說我者，若告我以鬼事，則我不能知也；若告我以人事者，不過此矣，皆吾所聞知也。今吾告子以人之情：目欲視色，耳欲聽聲，口欲察味，志氣欲盈。人上壽百歲，中壽八十，下壽六十，除病瘦、死喪、憂患，其中開口而笑者，一月之中不過四五日而已矣。天與地無窮，人死者有時，操有時之具而託於無窮之間，忽然無異騏驥之馳過隙也。不能說其志意，養其壽命者，皆非通道者也。丘之所言，皆吾之所棄也，亟去走歸，無復言之！子之道，狂狂汲汲，詐巧虛偽事也，非可以全真也，奚足論哉？」
'And as to the admonitions which you, Qiu, wish to impress on me, if you tell me about the state of the dead, I am unable to know anything about it; if you tell me about the things of men (alive), they are only such as I have stated, what I have heard and know all about. I will now tell you, Sir, my views about the condition of man. The eyes wish to look on beauty; the ears to hear music; the mouth to enjoy flavours; the will to be gratified. The greatest longevity man can reach is a hundred years; a medium longevity is eighty years; the lowest longevity is sixty. Take away sickness, pining, bereavement, mourning, anxieties, and calamities, the times when, in any of these, one can open his mouth and laugh, are only four or five days in a month. Heaven and earth have no limit of duration, but the death of man has its (appointed) time. Take the longest amount of a limited time, and compare it with what is unlimited, its brief existence is not different from the passing of a crevice by one of king Mu's horses. Those who cannot gratify their will and natural aims, and nourish their appointed longevity, are all unacquainted with the (right) Way (of life). I cast from me, Zhi, all that you say. Be quick and go. Hurry back and say not a word more. Your Way is only a wild recklessness, deceitful, artful, vain, and hypocritical. It is not available to complete the true (nature of man); it is not worth talking about!'

孔子再拜趨走，出門上車，執轡三失，目芒然無見，色若死灰，據軾低頭，不能出氣。歸到魯東門外，適遇柳下季。柳下季曰：「今者闕然數日不見，車馬有行色，得微往見跖邪？」孔子仰天而歎曰：「然。」柳下季曰：「跖得無逆汝意若前乎？」孔子曰：「然。丘所謂無病而自灸也，疾走料虎頭，編虎須，幾不免虎口哉！」
Confucius bowed twice, and hurried away. He went out at the door, and mounted his carriage. Thrice he missed the reins as he tried to take hold of them. His eyes were dazed, and he could not see; and his colour was that of slaked lime. He laid hold of the cross-bar, holding his head down, and unable to draw his breath. When he got back, outside the east gate of (the capital of) Lu, he encountered Liu-xia Ji, who said to him, 'Here you are, right in the gate. For some days I have not seen you. Your carriage and horses are travel-stained - have you not been to see Dao Zhi?' Confucius looked up to heaven, sighed, and said, 'Yes.' The other went on, 'And did he not set himself in opposition to all your views, as I said he would do?' 'He did. My case has been that of the man who cauterised himself without being ill. I rushed away, stroked the tiger's head, played with his whiskers, and narrowly escaped his mouth.'

子張1問於滿苟得曰：「盍不為行？無行則不信，不信則不任，不任則不利。故觀之名，計之利，而義真是也。若棄名利，反之於心，則夫士之為行，不可一日不為乎？」滿苟得曰：「無恥者富，多信者顯。夫名利之大者，幾在無恥而信。故觀之名，計之利，而信真是也。若棄名利，反之於心，則夫士之為行，抱其天乎！」
The Robber Zhi:	
Zi-zhang asked Man Gou-de, saying, 'Why do you not pursue a (righteous) course? Without such a course you will not be believed in; unless you are believed in, you will not be employed in office; and if not employed in office, you will not acquire gain. Thus, if you look at the matter from the point of reputation, or estimate it from the point of gain, a righteous course is truly the right thing. If you discard the thought of reputation and gain, yet when you think over the thing in your own mind, you will see that the scholar should not be a single day without pursuing a (righteous) course.' Man Gou-de said, 'He who has no shame becomes rich, and he in whom many believe becomes illustrious. Thus the greatest fame and gain would seem to spring from being without shame and being believed in. Therefore if you look at the matter from the point of reputation, or estimate it from the point of gain, to be believed in is the right thing. If you discard the thought of fame and gain, and think over the thing in your own mind, you will see that the scholar in the course which he pursues is (simply) holding fast his Heavenly (nature, and gaining nothing).'

子張曰：「昔者桀、紂貴為天子，富有天下，今謂臧聚曰『汝行如桀、紂』，則有怍色，有不服之心者，小人所賤也。仲尼、墨翟，窮為匹夫，今謂宰相曰『子行如仲尼、墨翟』，則變容易色稱不足者，士誠貴也。故勢為天子，未必貴也；窮為匹夫，未必賤也。貴賤之分，在行之美惡。」滿苟得曰：「小盜者拘，大盜者為諸侯，諸侯之門，義士存焉。昔者桓公小白殺兄入嫂而管仲為臣，田成子常殺君竊國而孔子受幣。論則賤之，行則下之，則是言行之情悖戰於胸中也，不亦拂乎！故《書》曰：『孰惡孰美？成者為首，不成者為尾。』」
Zi-zhang said, 'Formerly Jie and Zhou each enjoyed the honour of being the sovereign, and all the wealth of the kingdom was his; but if you now say to a (mere) money-grabber, "Your conduct is like that of Jie or Zhou," he will look ashamed, and resent the imputation: (these two sovereigns) are despised by the smallest men. Zhongni and Mo Di (on the other hand) were poor, and common men; but if you say to a Prime Minister that his conduct is like that of Zhongni or Mo Di, then he will be put out and change countenance, and protest that he is not worthy (to be so spoken of): (these two philosophers) are held to be truly noble by (all) scholars. Thus it is that the position of sovereign does not necessarily connect with being thought noble, nor the condition of being poor and of common rank with being thought mean. The difference of being thought noble or mean arises from the conduct being good or bad.' Man Gou-de replied, 'Small robbers are put in prison; a great robber becomes a feudal lord; and in the gate of the feudal lord your righteous scholars will be found. For instance, Xi-bo, the duke Huan, killed his elder brother, and took his sister-in-law to himself, and yet Guan Zhong became his minister; and Tian Cheng, styled Cheng-zi, killed his ruler, and usurped the state, and yet Confucius received a present of silks from him. In their discussions they would condemn the men, but in their conduct they abased themselves before them. In this way their words and actions must have been at war together in their breasts - was it not a contradiction and perversity? As it is said in a book, "Who is bad? and who is good? The successful is regarded as the Head, and the unsuccessful as the Tail."'

子張曰：「子不為行，即將疏戚無倫，貴賤無義，長幼無序，五紀六位將何以為別乎？」滿苟得曰：「堯殺長子，舜流母弟，疏戚有倫乎？湯放桀，武王伐紂，貴賤有義乎？王季為適，周公殺兄，長幼有序乎？儒者偽辭，墨者兼愛，五紀六位將有別乎？且子正為名，我正為利。名利之實，不順於理，不監於道。吾日與子訟於無約，曰：『小人殉財，君子殉名。其所以變其情，易其性，則異矣；乃至於棄其所為而殉其所不為，則一也。』故曰：無為小人，反殉而天；無為君子，從天之理。若枉若直，相而天極，面觀四方，與時消息。若是若非，執而圓機，獨成而意，與道徘徊。無轉而行，無成而義，將失而所為。無赴而富，無殉而成，將棄而天。比干剖心，子胥抉眼，忠之禍也；直躬證父，尾生溺死，信之患也；鮑子立乾，申子不自理，廉之害也；孔子不見母，匡子不見父，義之失也。此上世之所傳，下世之所語，以為士者正其言，必其行，故服其殃，離其患也。」
Zi-zhang said, 'If you do not follow the usual course of what is held to be right, but observe no distinction between the near and remote degrees of kin, no difference between the noble and the mean, no order between the old and the young, then how shall a separation be made of the fivefold arrangement (of the virtues), and the six parties (in the social organisation)?' Man Gou-de replied, 'Yao killed his eldest son, and Shun banished his half-brother': did they observe the rules about the different degrees of kin? Tang deposed Jie; king Wu overthrew Zhou: did they observe the righteousness that should obtain between the noble and the mean? King Ji took the place of his elder brother, and the duke of Zhou killed his: did they observe the order that should obtain between the elder and the younger? The Literati make hypocritical speeches; the followers of Mo hold that all should be loved equally: do we find in them the separation of the fivefold arrangement (of the virtues), and the six parties (in the social organisation)? And further, you, Sir, are all for reputation, and I am all for gain; but where the actual search for reputation and gain may not be in accordance with principle and will not bear to be examined in the light of the right way, let me and you refer the matter to-morrow to the decision of Wu-yue.' (This Wu-yue) said, 'The small man pursues after wealth; the superior man pursues after reputation. The way in which they change their feelings and alter their nature is different; but if they were to cast away what they do, and replace it with doing nothing, they would be the same. Hence it is said, "Do not be a small man - return and pursue after the Heavenly in you. Do not be a superior man - follow the rule of the Heavenly in you. Be it crooked, be it straight, view the thing in the light of Heaven as revealed in you. Look all round on every side of it, and as the time indicates, cease your endeavours. Be it right, be it wrong, hold fast the ring in yourself in which all conditions converge. Alone by yourself, carry out your idea; ponder over the right way. Do not turn your course; do not try to complete your righteousness. You will fail in what you do. Do not haste to be rich; do not follow after your perfection. If you do, you will lose the heavenly in you." Bi-gan had his heart cut out; Zi-xu had his eyes gouged out: such were the evil consequences of their loyalty. The upright person bore witness against his father; Wei Sheng was drowned: such were the misfortunes of good faith. Bao-zi stood till he was dried up; Shan-zi would not defend himself: such were the injuries brought on by disinterestedness. Confucius did not see his mother; Kuang-zi did not see his father: such were the failures of the righteous. These are instances handed down from former ages, and talked about in these later times. They show us how superior men, in their determination to be correct in their words and resolute in their conduct, paid the penalty of these misfortunes, and were involved in these distresses.'
1. 子張 : 這裡只是借用他的名字，並不是真的寫子張其人其事。

無足問於知和曰：「人卒未有不興名就利者。彼富則人歸之，歸則下之，下則貴之。夫見下貴者，所以長生、安體、樂意之道也。今子獨無意焉，知不足邪？意知而力不能行邪？故推正不忘邪？」知和曰：「今夫此人以為與己同時而生、同鄉而處者，以為夫絕俗過世之士焉，是專無主正，所以覽古今之時，是非之分也，與俗化世。去至重，棄至尊，以為其所為也，此其所以論長生、安體、樂意之道，不亦遠乎！慘怛之疾，恬愉之安，不監於體；怵惕之恐，欣懽之喜，不監於心。知為為而不知所以為，是以貴為天子，富有天下，而不免於患也。」
The Robber Zhi:	
Mr. Dissatisfied asked Mr. Know-the-Mean, saying, 'There is no man after all who does not strive for reputation and pursue after gain. When men are rich, then others go to them. Going to them, they put themselves beneath them. In that position they do honour to them as nobler than themselves. But to see others taking that position and doing honour to us is the way to prolong life, and to secure the rest of the body and the satisfaction of the mind. You alone, Sir, however, have no idea of this. Is it that your knowledge is deficient? Is it that you have the knowledge, but want the strength to carry it into practice? Or is it that your mind is made up to do what you consider right, and never allow yourself to forget it?' Know-the-Mean replied, 'Here now is this man judging of us, his contemporaries, and living in the same neighbourhood as himself, that we consider ourselves scholars who have abjured all vulgar ways and risen above the world. He is entirely without the thought of submitting to the rule of what is right. He therefore studies ancient times and the present, and the differing questions about the right and wrong, and agrees with the vulgar ideas and influences of the age, abandoning what is most important and discarding what is most honourable, in order to be free to act as he does. But is he not wide of the mark when he thinks that this is the way to promote long life, and to secure the rest of the body and the satisfaction of the mind? He has his painful afflictions and his quiet repose, but he does not inquire how his body is so variously affected; he has his apprehensive terrors, and his happy joys, but he does not inquire how his mind has such different experiences. He knows how to pursue his course, but he does not know why he does so. Even if he had the dignity of the Son of Heaven, and all the wealth of the kingdom were his, he would not be beyond the reach of misfortunes and evils.'

無足曰：「夫富之於人，無所不利，窮美究埶，至人之所不得逮，賢人之所不能及，俠人之勇力而不為威強，秉人之知謀以為明察，因人之德以為賢良，非享國而嚴若君父。且夫聲色、滋味、權勢之於人，心不待學而樂之，體不待象而安之。夫欲惡避就，固不待師，此人之性也。天下雖非我，孰能辭之！」知和曰：「知者之為，故動以百姓，不違其度，是以足而不爭，無以為故不求。不足故求之，爭四處而不自以為貪；有餘故辭之，棄天下而不自以為廉。廉貪之實，非以迫外也，反監之度。勢為天子而不以貴驕人，富有天下而不以財戲人。計其患，慮其反，以為害於性，故辭而不受也，非以要名譽也。堯、舜為帝而雍，非仁天下也，不以美害生也；善卷、許由得帝而不受，非虛辭讓也，不以事害己。此皆就其利，辭其害，而天下稱賢焉，則可以有之，彼非以興名譽也。」
Dissatisfied rejoined, 'But riches are in every way advantageous to man. With them his attainment of the beautiful and mastery of every art become what the perfect man cannot obtain nor the sagely man reach to; his appropriation of the bravery and strength of others enables him to exercise a powerful sway; his availing himself of the wisdom and plans of others makes him be accounted intelligent and discriminating; his taking advantage of the virtues of others makes him be esteemed able and good. Though he may not be the holder of a state, he is looked to with awe as a ruler and father. Moreover, music, beauty, with the pleasures of the taste and of power, are appreciated by men's minds and rejoiced in without any previous learning of them; the body reposes in them without waiting for the example of others. Desire and dislike, avoidance and pursuit, do not require any master - this is the nature of man. Though the world may condemn one's indulgence of them, who can refrain from it?' Know-the-Mean replied, 'The action of the wise is directed for the good of the people, but they do not go against the (proper) rule and degree. Therefore when they have enough, they do not strive (for more); they have no further object, and so they do not seek for one. When they have not enough, they will seek for it; they will strive for it in every quarter, and yet not think of themselves as greedy. If they have (already) a superfluity, they will decline (any more); they will decline the throne, and yet not think of themselves as disinterested: the conditions of disinterestedness and greediness are (with them) not from the constraint of anything external. Through their exercise of introspection, their power may be that of the sovereign, but they will not in their nobility be arrogant to others; their wealth may be that of the whole kingdom, but they will not in their possession of it make a mock of others. They estimate the evils to which they are exposed, and are anxious about the reverses which they may experience. They think how their possessions may be injurious to their nature, and therefore they will decline and not accept them - but not because they seek for reputation and praise. Yao and Shun were the sovereigns, and harmony prevailed. It did so, not because of their benevolence towards the people - they would not, for what was (deemed) admirable, injure their lives. Shan Juan and Xu You might have been the sovereigns, but they would not receive the throne - not that they declined it without purpose, but they would not by its occupancy injure themselves. These all followed after what was advantageous to them, and declined what was injurious, and all the world celebrates their superiority. Thus, though they enjoy the distinction, they did what they did, not for the sake of the reputation and praise.'

無足曰：「必持其名，苦體絕甘，約養以持生，則亦久病長阨而不死者也。」知和曰：「平為福，有餘為害者，物莫不然，而財其甚者也。今富人耳營鐘鼓筦籥之聲，口嗛於芻豢醪醴之味，以感其意，遺忘其業，可謂亂矣；侅溺於馮氣，若負重行而上也，可謂苦矣；貪財而取慰，貪權而取竭，靜居則溺，體澤則馮，可謂疾矣；為欲富就利，故滿若堵耳而不知避，且馮而不舍，可謂辱矣；財積而無用，服膺而不舍，滿心戚醮，求益而不止，可謂憂矣；內則疑劫請之賊，外則畏寇盜之害，內周樓疏，外不敢獨行，可謂畏矣。此六者，天下之至害也，皆遺忘而不知察，及其患至，求盡性竭財，單以反一日之無故而不可得也。故觀之名則不見，求之利則不得，繚意體而爭此，不亦惑乎！」
Dissatisfied (continued his argument), saying, 'In thus thinking it necessary for their reputation, they bitterly distressed their bodies, denied themselves what was pleasant, and restricted themselves to a bare sustenance in order to sustain their life; but so they had life-long distress, and long-continued pressure till their death arrived.' Know-the-Mean replied, 'Tranquil ease is happiness; a superfluity is injurious: so it is with all things, and especially it is so, where the superfluity is of wealth. The ears of the rich are provided with the music of bells, drums, flageolets and flutes; and their mouths are stuffed with the flesh of fed beasts and with wine of the richest flavour; so are their desires satisfied, till they forget their proper business: theirs may be pronounced a condition of disorder. Sunk deeply in their self-sufficiency, they resemble individuals ascending a height with a heavy burden on their backs: their condition may be pronounced one of bitter suffering. They covet riches, thinking to derive comfort from them; they covet power, and would fain monopolise it; when quiet and retired, they are drowned in luxurious indulgence; their persons seem to shine, and they are full of boasting: they may be said to be in a state of disease. In their desire to be rich and striving for gain, they fill their stores, and, deaf to all admonition, refuse to desist from their course. They are even more elated, and hold on their way: their conduct may be pronounced disgraceful. When their wealth is amassed till they cannot use it, they clasp it to their breasts and will not part with it; when their hearts are distressed with their very fulness, they still seek for more and will not desist: their condition may be said to be sad. In-doors they are apprehensive of pilfering and begging thieves, and out-of-doors they are afraid of being injured by plundering robbers; in-doors they have many chambers and partitions, and out-of-doors they do not dare to go alone: they may be said to be in a state of (constant) alarm. These six conditions are the most deplorable in the world, but they forget them all, and have lost their faculty of judgment. When the evil comes, though they begged it with all the powers of their nature, and by the sacrifice of all their wealth, they could not bring back one day of untroubled peace. When they look for their reputation, it is not to be seen; when they seek for their wealth, it is not to be got. To task their thoughts, and destroy their bodies, striving for (such an end as) this - is it not a case of great delusion ?'

<p>Source: Chinese Text Project <a href="http://ctext.org/zhuangzi">http://ctext.org/zhuangzi</a>, English translation: 'The Writings of Chuang Tzu', James Legge, 1891</p>