毛詩序：「《雲漢》，仍叔美宣王也。宣王承厲王之烈，內有撥亂之志，遇烖而懼，側身脩行，欲銷去之。天下喜於王化復行，百姓見憂，故作是詩也。」[1]


雲漢
倬彼雲漢，昭回于天。王曰於乎，何辜今之人？天降喪亂，饑饉薦臻。
靡神不舉，靡愛斯牲。圭璧既卒，寧莫我聽。

Bright was that milky way,
Shining and revolving in the sky.
The king said, 'Oh!
What crime is chargeable on us now,
That Heaven [thus] sends down death and disorder?
Famine comes again and again.
There is no victim I have grudged;
Our maces and other tokens are exhausted:
How is it that I am not heard?

旱既大甚，蘊隆蟲蟲。不殄禋祀，自郊徂宮。上下奠瘞，靡神不宗。
后稷不克，上帝不臨。耗斁下土，寧丁我躬。

'The drought is excessive;
Its fervours become more and more tormenting.
I have not ceased offering pure sacrifices;
From the border altars I have gone to the ancestral temple.
To the [Powers] above and below I have presented my offerings and then buried them:
There is no Spirit whom I have not honoured.
Hou-ji is not equal to the occasion;
God does not come to us.
This wasting and ruin of our country, -
Would that it fell [only] on me!

旱既大甚，則不可推。兢兢業業，如霆如雷。周餘黎民，靡有孑遺。
昊天上帝，則不我遺。胡不相畏？先祖于摧。

'The drought is excessive;
And I may not try to excuse myself.
I am full of terror and feel the peril,
Like the clap of thunder or the roll.
Of the remnant of Zhou, among the black-haired people,
There will not be half a man left;
Nor will God from His great heaven,
Exempt [even] me.
Shall we not mingle our fears together?
[The sacrifices to] my ancestors will be extinguished.

旱既大甚，則不可沮。赫赫炎炎，云我無所。大命近止，靡瞻靡顧。
羣公先正，則不我助。父母先祖，胡寧忍予？

'The drought is excessive;
And it cannot be stopped.
More fierce and fiery,
It is leaving me no place.
My end is near; -
I have none to look up to, none to look around to.
The many dukes and their ministers of the past,
Give me no help.
O ye parents and [nearer] ancestors,
How can ye bear to see us thus?

旱既大甚，滌滌山川。旱魃為虐，如惔如焚。我心憚暑，憂心如薰。
羣公先正，則不我聞。昊天上帝，寧俾我遯？

'The drought is excessive; -
Parched are the hills, and the streams are dried.
The demon of drought exercises his oppression.
As if scattering flames and fire.
My heart is terrified with the heat; -
My sorrowing heart is as if on fire.
The many dukes and their ministers of the past,
Do not hear me,
O God, from Thy great heaven,
Grant me the liberty to withdraw [into retirement]!

旱既大甚，黽勉畏去。胡寧瘨我以旱？憯不知其故。祈年孔夙，方社不莫。
昊天上帝，則不我虞。敬恭明神，宜無悔怒。

'The drought is excessive; -
I struggle, and fear to go away.
How is it I am afflicted with this drought?
I cannot ascertain the cause of it.
In praying for a good year I was abundantly early;
I was not late [in sacrificing] to [the Spirits] of the four quarters and of the land.
God in the great heaven,
Does not consider me.
Reverent to the intelligent Spirits,
I ought not to be thus the object of their anger.

旱既大甚，散無友紀。鞫哉庶正，疚哉冢宰。趣馬師氏，膳夫左右。
靡人不周，無不能止。瞻卬昊天，云如何里？[2]

'The drought is excessive; -
All is dispersion, and the bonds of government are relaxed.
Reduced to extremities are the Heads of departments;
Full of distress are my chief minister,
The master of the horse, the commander of the guards,
The chief cook, and my attendants.
There is no one who has not [tried to] help [the people];
They have not refrained on the ground of being unable.
I look up to the great heaven; -
Why am I plunged in this sorrow?

瞻卬昊天，有嘒其星。大夫君子，昭假無贏。大命近止，無棄爾成。[3]
何求為我？以戾庶正。瞻卬昊天，曷惠其寧？

'I look up to the great heaven,
But its stars sparkle bright.
My great officers and excellent men,
Ye have drawn near [to Heaven] with reverence with all your powers.
Death is approaching,
But do not cast away what you have done.
You are seeking not for me only,
But to give rest to all our departments.
I look up to the great heaven; -
When shall I be favoured with repose?

《雲漢》，八章，章十句。

註解
 烖，《延文本》作災。
 卬，《延文本》作仰。下同。
 棄，《唐石經》作弃。


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge