毛詩序：「《緜》，文王之興，本由大王也。」


緜
緜緜瓜瓞，民之初生，自土沮漆。古公亶父，陶復陶宂，未有家室。

In long trains ever increasing grow the gourds.
When [our] people first sprang,
From the country about the Ju and the Qi,
The ancient duke Dan-fu,
Made for them kiln-like huts and caves,
Ere they had yet any houses.

古公亶父，來朝走馬。率西水滸，至于岐下。爰及姜女，聿來胥宇。

The ancient duke Dan-fu,
Came in the morning, galloping his horses,
Along the banks of the western rivers,
To the foot of [mount] Qi;
And there, he and the lady Jiang,
Came, and together looked out for a site on which to settle.

周原膴膴，堇荼如飴。爰始爰謀，爰契我龜。曰止曰時，築室于茲。

The plain of Zhou looked beautiful and rich,
With its violets and sowthistles [sweet] as dumplings.
There he began with consulting [his followers];
There he singed the tortoise-shell, [and divined].
The responses were - there to stay, and then;
And they proceeded there to build their houses.

廼慰廼止，廼左廼右。廼疆廼理，廼宣廼畝。自西徂東，周爰執事。

He encouraged the people and settled them;
Here on the left, there on the right.
He divided the ground into larger tracts and smaller portions;
He dug the ditches; he defined the acres;
From the west to the east,
There was nothing which he did not take in hand.

乃召司空，乃召司徒。俾立室家，其繩則直。縮版以載，作廟翼翼。

He called his superintendent of works;
He called his minister of instruction;
And charged them with the building of the houses.
With the line they made everything straight;
They bound the frame-boards tight, so that they should rise regularly.
Uprose the ancestral temple in its solemn grandeur.

捄之陾陾，度之薨薨。築之登登，削屢馮馮。百堵皆興，鼛鼓弗勝。

Crowds brought the earth in baskets
They threw it with shouts into the frames;
They beat it with responsive blows;
They pared the walls repeatedly, and they sounded strong.
Five thousand cubits of them arose together,
So that the roll of the great drum did not overpower [the noise of the builders].

廼立皐門，皐門有伉。廼立應門，應門將將。廼立冢土，戎醜攸行。

They set up the gate of the enceinte;
And the gate of the enceinte stood high.
They set up the court gate;
And the court gate stood grand.
They reared the great altar [to the Spirits of the land],
From which all great movements should proceed.

肆不殄厥慍，亦不隕厥問。柞棫拔矣，行道兌矣。混夷駾矣，維其喙矣。

Thus though he could nto prevent the rage [of his foes],
He did not let fall his own fame.
The oaks and the Yu were [gradually] thinned,
And roads for travelling were opened.
The hordes of the Hun disappeared,
Startled and panting.

虞芮質厥成，文王蹶厥生。予曰有疏附，予曰有先後。予曰有奔奏，予曰有禦侮。

[The chiefs of] Yu and Rui were brought to an agreement,
By king Wen's stimulating their natural virtue.
Then, I may say, some came to him, previously not knowing him;
And some, drawn the last by the first;
And some, drawn by his rapid success;
Ans some, by his defence [of the weak] from insult.


《緜》，九章，章六句。


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge