毛詩序：「《江漢》，尹吉甫美宣王也。能興衰撥亂，命召公平淮夷。」


江漢
江漢浮浮，武夫滔滔。匪安匪遊，淮夷來求。
既出我車，既設我旟，匪安匪舒，淮夷來鋪。

Large was the volume of the Jiang and the Han,
And the troops advanced like a flowing current.
There was no resting, no idle wandering; -
We were seeking for the tribes of the Huai.
We had sent forth our chariots;
We had displayed our falcon-banners.
There was no resting, no remissness; -
Against the tribes of the Huai were we marshalled.

江漢湯湯，武夫洸洸。經營四方，告成于王。
四方既平，王國庶定。時靡有爭，王心載寧。

Large flowed the Jiang and the Han,
And grandly martial looked the troops.
The whole country had been reduced to order,
And an announcement of our success had been made to be king.
When the whole country was pacified,
The king's State began to feel settled.
There was then an end of strife,
And the king's heart was composed.

江漢之滸，王命召虎。式辟四方，徹我疆土。
匪疚匪棘，王國來極。于疆于理，至于南海。

On the banks of the Jiang and the Han,
The king had given charge to Hu of Shao:
'Open up the whole of the country;
Make the statutory division of my lands there;
Not to distress the people, nor with urgency,
But making them conform to the royal state.
Make the larger and the smaller divisions of the ground,
As far as the southern sea.'

王命召虎，來旬來宣。文武受命，召公維翰。
無曰予小子，召公是似。肇敏戎公，用錫爾祉。

The king gave charge to Hu of Shao:
'You have everywhere diffused [and carried out my orders].
When Wen and Wu received their appointment,
The duke of Shao was their strong support.
You do not [only] have a regard to me the little child,
But you try to resemble that duke of Shao.
You have commenced and earnestly displayed your merit;
And I will make you happy.

釐爾圭瓚，秬鬯一卣，告于文人。
錫山土田，于周受命，自召祖命。
虎拜稽首，天子萬年。

'I give you a large libation-cup of jade,
And a jar of herb-flavoured spirits from the black millet.
I have made announcement to the accomplished one,
And confer on you hills, lands, and fields.
In [Qi]zhou shall you receive investiture,
According as your ancestor received his. '
Hu bowed with his head to the ground, [and said],
'May the Son of Heaven live for ever! '

虎拜稽首，對揚王休。作召公考，天子萬壽。
明明天子，令聞不已。矢其文德，洽此四國。

Hu bowed with his head to the ground,
And in response displayed the goodness of the king,
And roused himself to maintain the fame of his ancestor.
'May the Son of Heaven live for ever!
Very intelligent is the Son of Heaven;
His good fame shall be without end.
Let him display his civil virtues,
Till they permeate all quarters of the kingdom.


《江漢》，六章，章八句。


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge