毛詩序：「《東山》，周公東征也。周公東征，三年而歸，勞歸士大夫美之，故作是詩也。一章言其完也，二章言其思也，三章言其室家之望女也，四章樂男女之得及時也。君子之於人，序其情而閔其勞，所以說也。說以使民，民忘其死，其唯東山乎。」


東山
我徂東山，慆慆不歸。我來自東，零雨其濛。我東曰歸，我心西悲。
制彼裳衣，勿士行枚。蜎蜎者蠋，烝在桑野。敦彼獨宿，亦在車下。

We went to the hills of the east,
And long were we there without returning,
When we came back from the east,
Down came the rain drizzlingly.
When we were in the east, and it was said we should return,
Our hearts were in the west and sad;
But there were they preparing our clothes for us,
As to serve no more in the ranks with the gags.
Creeping about were the caterpillars,
All over the mulberry grounds;
And quietly and solitarily did we pass the night,
Under our carriages.

我徂東山，慆慆不歸。我來自東，零雨其濛。果臝之實，亦施于宇。
伊威在室，蠨蛸在戶。町畽鹿場，熠燿宵行。不可畏也，伊可懷也。

We went to the hills of the east,
And long were we there without returning,
When we came back from the east,
Down came the rain drizzlingly.
The fruit of the heavenly gourd,
Would be hanging about our eaves;
The sowbug would be in our chambers;
The spiders' webs would be in our doors;
Our paddocks would be deer-fields;
The fitful light of the glow-worms would be all about.
These thoughts made us apprehensive,
And they occupied our breasts.

我徂東山，慆慆不歸。我來自東，零雨其濛。鸛鳴于垤，婦歎于室。
洒埽穹窒，我征聿至。有敦瓜苦，烝在栗薪。自我不見，于今三年。

We went to the hills of the east,
And long were we there without returning,
On our way back from the east,
Down came the rain drizzlingly.
The cranes were crying on the ant-hills;
Our wives were sighing in their rooms;
They had sprinkled and swept, and stuffed up all the crevices.
Suddenly we arrived from the expedition,
And there were the bitter gourds hanging,
From the branches of the chestnut trees.
Since we had seen such a sight,
Three years were now elapsed.

我徂東山，慆慆不歸。我來自東，零雨其濛。倉庚于飛，熠燿其羽。
之子于歸，皇駁其馬。親結其縭，九十其儀。其新孔嘉，其舊如之何？

We went to the hills of the east,
And long were we there without returning,
On our way back from the east,
Down came the rain drizzlingly.
The oriole is flying about,
Now here, now there, are its wings.
Those young ladies are going to be married,
With their bay and red horses, flecked with white.
Their mothers have tied their sashes;
Complete are their equipments.
The new matches are admirable; -
How can the reunions of the old be expressed?

《東山》，四章，章十二句。


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge