毛詩序：「《節南山》，家父刺幽王也。」


節南山
節彼南山，維石巖巖。赫赫師尹，民具爾瞻。
憂心如惔，不敢戲談。國既卒斬，何用不監！

Lofty is that southern hill,
With its masses of rocks!
Awe-inspiring are you, O [Grand] master Yin,
And the people all look to you!
A fire burns in their grieving hearts;
They do not dare to speak of you even in jest.
The kingdom is verging to extinction; -
How is it that you do not consider the state of things?

節彼南山，有實其猗。赫赫師尹，不平謂何？
天方薦瘥，喪亂弘多。民言無嘉，憯莫懲嗟。

Lofty is that southern hill,
And vigorously grows the vegetation on it!
Awe-inspiring are you, O [Grand] master Yin,
But how is it that you are so unjust?
Heaven is continually redoubling its afflictions;
Deaths and disorder increase and multiply;
No words of satisfaction come from the people;
And yet you do not correct nor bemoan yourself!

尹氏大師，維周之氐。秉國之均，四方是維。
天子是毗，俾民不迷。不弔昊天，不宜空我師。

The Grand-master Yin,
Is the foundation of our Zhou,
And the balance of the State is in his hands.
He should be keeping together the four quarters [of the kingdom];
He should be aiding the Son of Heaven,
So as to preserve the people from going astray.
O unpitying great Heaven,
It is not right he should reduce us all to such misery!

弗躬弗親，庶民弗信；弗問弗仕，勿罔君子？
式夷式已，無小人殆。瑣瑣姻亞，則無膴仕。

Doing nothing himself personally,
The people have no confidence in him,
By making no inquiry, and no trial of their services,
He should not deal deceitfully with superior men.
By dismissing them on the requirement of justice,
Mean men would not be endangering [the common weal];
And his mean relatives,
Would not be in offices of importance.

昊天不傭，降此鞠訩。昊天不惠，降此大戾。
君子如屆，俾民心闋。君子如夷，惡怒是違。

Great Heaven, unjust,
Is sending down these exhausting disorders.
Great Heaven, unkind,
Is sending down these great miseries.
Let superior men come [into office],
And that would bring rest to the people's hearts.
Let superior men do justly,
And the animosities and angers would disappear.

不弔昊天，亂靡有定。式月斯生，俾民不寧。
憂心如酲，誰秉國成？不自為政，卒勞百姓。

O unpitying, great Heaven,
There is no end to the disorder!
With every month it continues to grow,
So that the people have no repose.
I am as if intoxicated with the grief of my heart.
Who holds the ordering of the kingdom?
Not attending himself to the government,
The issue is toil and pain to the people.

駕彼四牡，四牡項領。我瞻四方，蹙蹙靡所騁。

I yoke my four steeds,
My four steeds, long-necked.
I look to the four quarters [of the kingdom];
Distress is everywhere; there is nowhere I can drive to.

方茂爾惡，相爾矛矣。既夷既懌，如相醻矣。

Now your evil is rampant,
And I see your spears.
Again you are pacified and friendly,
As if you were pledging one another.

昊天不平，我王不寧。不懲其心，覆怨其正。

From great Heaven is the injustice,
And our king has no repose.
[Yet] he will not correct his heart,
And goes on to resent endeavours to rectify him.

家父作誦，以究王訩。式訛爾心，以畜萬邦。

I, Jia-fu, have made this song,
To lay bare the king's disorders.
If you would but change your heart,
And nourish the myriad States! -

《節南山》，十章：六章，章八句；四章，章四句。


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge