毛詩序：「《崧高》，尹吉甫美宣王也。天下復平，能建國親諸侯，褒賞申伯焉。」


崧高
崧高維嶽，駿極于天。維嶽降神，生甫及申。
維申及甫，維周之翰。四國于蕃，四方于宣。

Grandly lofty are the mountains,
With their large masses reaching to the heavens.
From these mountains was sent down a Spirit,
Who gave birth to [the princes of] Fu and shen.
Fu and Shen,
Are the support of Zhou,
Screens to all the States,
Diffusing [their influence] over the four quarters of the kingdom.

亹亹申伯，王纘之事。于邑于謝，南國是式。
王命召伯，定申伯之宅。登是南邦，世執其功。

Full of activity is the chief of Shen,
And the king would employ him to continue the services [of his fathers],
With his capital in Xie,
Where he should be a pattern to the States of the south.
The king gave charge to the earl of Shao,
To arrange all about the residence of the chief of Shen,
Where he should do what was neccessary for the regions of the south,
And where his posterity might maintain his merit.

王命申伯，式是南邦。因是謝人，以作爾庸。
王命召伯，徹申伯土田。王命傅御，遷其私人。

The king gave charge to the chief of Shen,
'Be a pattern to the regions of the south,
And by means of those people of Xie,
Proceed to display your merit. '
The king gave charge to the earl of Shao,
To make the statutory definition of the territory and fields of the chief of Shen.
The king gave charge to the chief 's steward,
To remove the members of his family to the spot.

申伯之功，召伯是營。有俶其城，寢廟既成。
既成藐藐，王錫申伯。四牡蹻蹻，鉤膺濯濯。

Of the services of the chief of Shen,
The foundation was laid by the earl of Shao,
Who built first the walls [of this city],
And then completed his ancestral temple.
When the temple was completed, wide and grand,
The king conferred on the chief of Shen,
Four noble steeds,
With their hooks for the trappings of the breast-bands, glittering bright.

王遣申伯，路車乘馬。我圖爾居，莫如南土。
錫爾介圭，以作爾寶。往近王舅，南土是保。

The king sent away the chief of Shen,
With its carriage of state and its team of horses.
'I have consulted about your residence,
That it had best be fixed in the South.
I confer on you a great sceptre,
As the symbol of your dignity.
Go, my uncle,
And protect the country of the South.'

申伯信邁，王餞于郿。申伯還南，謝于誠歸。
王命召伯，徹申伯土疆。以峙其粻，式遄其行。

The chief of Shen took his departure,
And the king gave him a parting feast in Mei.
Then the chief of Shen returned, [and proceeded] to the south,
And found himself at last in Xie.
The king had given charge to the earl of Shao,
To make the statutory division of the lands,
And to lay up stores of provisions,
That the progress of the chief might be accelerated.

申伯番番，既入于謝，徒御嘽嘽。
周邦咸喜，戎有良翰。不顯申伯，王之元舅，文武是憲。

Martial-like, the chief of Shen,
Entered into Xie.
His footmen and charioteers were numerous,
And throughout the regions of Zhou all rejoiced.
'You have got a good support:
Very distinguished is the chief of Shen,
The great uncle of the king,
The pattern of the officers, both civil and military. '

申伯之德，柔惠且直。揉此萬邦，聞于四國。
吉甫作誦，其詩孔碩。其風肆好，以贈申伯。

The virtue of the chief of Shen,
Is mild, and regulated, and upright.
He will keep all these countries in order,
And be famed throughout the kingdom.
[I], Ji-fu, made this song,
An ode of great excellence,
Of influence good,
To present to the chief of Shen.

《崧高》，八章，章八句。


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge