毛詩序：「《烝民》，尹吉甫美宣王也。任賢使能，周室中興焉。」


烝民
天生烝民，有物有則。民之秉彝，好是懿德。
天監有周，昭假于下。保茲天子，生仲山甫。

Heaven, in giving birth to the multitudes of the people,
To every faculty and relationship annexed its law.
The people possess this normal nature,
And they [consequently] love its normal virtue.
Heaven beheld the ruler of Zhou,
Brilliantly affecting it by his conduct below;
And to maintain him, its Son,
Gave birth to Zhong Shan-fu.

仲山甫之德，柔嘉維則。令儀令色，小心翼翼。
古訓是式，威儀是力。天子是若，明命使賦。

The virtue of Zhong Shan-fu,
Is mild and admirable, according as it ought to be.
Good is his deportment; good his looks;
The lessons of antiquity are his law;
He is strenuously attentive to his deportment.
In full accord with the Son of Heaven,
He is employed to spread abroad his bright decrees.

王命仲山甫，式是百辟。纘戎祖考，王躬是保。
出納王命，王之喉舌。賦政于外，四方爰發。

The king gave charge to Zhong Shan-fu:
'Be a pattern to all the princes;
Continue [the services of] your ancestors.
You have to protect the royal person;
Give out the royal decrees, and report on them.
Be the king's throat and tongue;
Spread his government abroad,
So that in all quarters it shall be responded to. '

肅肅王命，仲山甫將之。邦國若否，仲山甫明之。
既明且哲，以保其身。夙夜匪解，以事一人。

Most dignified was the king's charge,
And Zhong Shan-fu carries it into execution.
In the States, the princes, be they good or bad,
Are clearly distinguished by Zhong Shan-fu.
Intelligent is he and wise,
Protecting his own person;
Never idle, day or night,
In the service of the One man.

人亦有言：柔則茹之，剛則吐之。
維仲山甫，柔亦不茹，剛亦不吐；不侮矜寡，不畏彊禦。

The people have a saying:
'The soft is devoured,
And the hard is ejected from the mouth. '
But Zhong Shan-fu,
Does not devour the soft,
Nor eject the powerful.
He does not insult the poor or the widow;
He does not fear the strong or the oppressive.

人亦有言：德輶如毛，民鮮克舉之。
我儀圖之，維仲山甫舉之。愛莫助之。袞職有闕，維仲山甫補之。

The people have a saying:
'Virtue is light as a hair,
But few are able to lift it. '
When I think of the matter,
It is only Zhong Shan-fu that can lift it.
I love him, but can do nothing to help him.
Any defects in the king's duties,
Are supplied by Zhong Shan-fu.

仲山甫出祖，四牡業業，征夫捷捷。
每懷靡及，四牡彭彭，八鸞鏘鏘。王命仲山甫，城彼東方。

Zhong Shan-fu went forth, having sacrificed to the Spirit of the road.
His four steeds were strong;
His men were alert;
He was always anxious lest he should not be equal to his commission;
His steeds went on without stopping,
To the tinkling of their eight bells.
The king had given charge to Zhong Shan-fu,
To fortify the city there in the east.

四牡騤騤，八鸞喈喈。仲山甫徂齊，式遄其歸。
吉甫作誦，穆如清風。仲山甫永懷，以慰其心。

With his four steeds so strong,
And their eight bells, all tinkling,
Zhong Shan-fu proceeded to Qi; -
And he will soon return.
I, Yin Ji-fu, have made this song:
May it enter like a quiet wind,
Among the constant anxieties of Zhong Shan-fu,
To soothe his mind!

《烝民》，八章，章八句。


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge