毛詩序：「《韓奕》，尹吉甫美宣王也。能錫命諸侯。」


韓奕
奕奕梁山，維禹甸之。有倬其道，韓侯受命。
王親命之，纘戎祖考，無廢朕命，夙夜匪解，虔共爾位。
朕命不易，榦不庭方，以佐戎辟。

Very grand is the mountain of Liang,
Which was made cultivable by Yu.
Bright it is the way from it,
[Along which came] the marquis of Han to receive investiture.
The king himself gave the charge:
'Continue the services of your ancestors;
Let not my charge to you come to nought.
Be diligent, early and late,
And reverently discharge your duties; -
So shall my appointment of you not change.
Be a support against those princes who do not come to court,
Thus assisting your sovereign. '

四牡奕奕，孔脩且張。韓侯入覲，以其介圭，入覲于王。
王錫韓侯，淑旂綏章。簟茀錯衡，玄袞赤舄。
鉤膺鏤鍚，鞹鞃淺幭，鞗革金厄。

With his four steeds, all noble,
Very long, and large,
The marquis of Han came to court,
With the large sceptre of his rank; -
He entered and appeared before the king.
The king gave him,
A fine dragon-flag, with its feathery ornaments;
A chequered bamboo-screen, and an ornamented yoke;
A dark-coloured robe with the dragons on it, and the redslippers;
The hooks for the trappings of the breast-bands, and the carved frontlets;
The leaning-board bound with leather, and a tiger's skin to cover it,
The ends of the reins, with their metal rings.

韓侯出祖，出宿于屠。顯父餞之，清酒百壺。
其殽維何？炰鼈鮮魚。其蔌維何？維筍及蒲。
其贈維何？乘馬路車。籩豆有且，侯氏燕胥。

When the marquis of Han left the court, he sacrificed to the Spirit of the road;
He went forth, and lodged for the night in Tu.
There Xian-fu gave him the parting feast; -
With a hundred vases of clear spirits.
And what were the viands?
Roast turtle and fresh fish.
And what were the vegetables?
Bamboo sprouts and pu.
And what were the gifts?
A carriage of state with its team.
Many were the vessels of sauces and fruits;
And the other princes [at court] joined in the feast.

韓侯取妻，汾王之甥，蹶父之子。
韓侯迎止，于蹶之里。百兩彭彭，八鸞鏘鏘，不顯其光。
諸娣從之，祁祁如雲。韓侯顧之，爛其盈門。

The marquis of Han took to himself a wife, -
A niece of king Fen,
The daughter of Jue-fu.
The marquis of Han went to receive her.
To the residence of Jue.
His hundred chariots were in grand array,
The eight bells of each emitting their tinkling; -
Illustrious was the glory [of the occasion].
The virgins, her companions, followed the lady,
Leisurely like a beautiful cloud.
The marquis of Han looked round at them,
Filling the gate with their splendour.

蹶父孔武，靡國不到。為韓姞相攸，莫如韓樂。
孔樂韓土，川澤訏訏。魴鱮甫甫，麀鹿噳噳。
有熊有羆，有貓有虎。慶既令居，韓姞燕譽。

Jue-fu is very martial,
And there is no State which he had not visited.
When he would select a home for Han-ji,
There seemed none so pleasant as Han,
Very pleasant is the territory of Han,
With its large streams and meres,
Full of big bream and tench;
With its multitudes of deer,
With its bears and grisly bears;
With its wild-cats and tigers.
Glad was he of so admirable a situation,
And here Han-ji found rest and joy.

溥彼韓城，燕師所完。以先祖受命，因時百蠻。
王錫韓侯，其追其貊。奄受北國，因以其伯。
實墉實壑，實畝實籍。獻其貔皮，赤豹黃羆。

Large is the wall of [the city of] Han,
Built by the multitudes of Yan.
As his ancestor had received charge,
To preside over all the wild tribes [of that quarter],
The king [now] gave to the marquis of Han,
The Zhui and the Mo,
Forthwith to hold the States of the north,
And to preside over them as their chief;
Making strong his walls, and deep his moats,
Laying out his fields, regulating his revenues,
Presenting his skins of the white fox,
With those of the red panther and the yellow grisly bear.


《韓奕》，六章，章十二句。


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge