毛詩序：「《賓之初筵》，衞武公刺時也。幽王荒廢，媟近小人，飲酒無度，天下化之。君臣上下，沈湎淫液，武公既入，而作是詩也。」


賓之初筵
賓之初筵，左右秩秩，籩豆有楚，殽核維旅。
酒既和旨，飲酒孔偕，鐘鼓既設，舉醻逸逸。
大侯既抗，弓矢斯張，射夫既同，獻爾發功。
發彼有的，以祈爾爵。

When the guests first approach the mats,
They take their places on the left and the right in an orderly manner.
The dishes of bamboo and wood are arranged in rows,
With the sauces and kernels displayed in them.
The spirits are mild and good,
And they drink, all equally reverent.
The bells and drums are properly arranged;
And they raise their pledge-cups with order and ease.
[Then] the great target is set up;
The bows and arrows are made ready for the shooting;
The archers are matched in classes.
' Show your skill in shooting, ' [it is said].
' I shall hit that mark, ' [it is responded],
'And pray you to drink the cup. '

籥舞笙鼓，樂既和奏，烝衎烈祖，以洽百禮。
百禮既至，有壬有林，錫爾純嘏，子孫其湛。
其湛曰樂，各奏爾能，賓載手仇，室人入又。
酌彼康爵，以奏爾時。

The dancers move with their flutes to the notes of the organ and drum,
While all the instruments perform in harmony.
All this is done to please the meritorious ancestors,
Along with the observance of all ceremonies.
When all the ceremonies have been performed,
Grandly and fully,
'We confer on you great blessings, ' [says the representative of the dead],
'And may your descendants [also] be happy! '
They are happy and delighted,
And each of them exerts his ability.
A guest draws the spirits,
An attendant enters again, with a cup,
And fills it, - the cup of rest.
Thus are performed your seasonal ceremonies.

賓之初筵，溫溫其恭，其未醉止，威儀反反。
曰既醉止，威儀幡幡，舍其坐遷，屢舞僊僊。
其未醉止，威儀抑抑，曰既醉止，威儀怭怭。
是曰既醉，不知其秩。

When the guests first approach the mats,
All harmonies are they and reverent.
Before they have drunk too much,
Their deportment is carefully observant of propriety;
But when they have drunk too much,
Their deportment becomes light and frivolous:
They leave their seats, and go elsewhere,
They keep dancing and capering.
Before they have drunk too much,
Their deportment is cautious and grave:
But when they have drunk too much,
Their deportment becomes indecent and rude:
Thus when they have too mcuh,
They lose all sense of orderliness.

賓既醉止，載號載呶，亂我籩豆，屢舞僛僛。
是曰既醉，不知其郵，側弁之俄，屢舞傞傞。
既醉而出，並受其福，醉而不出，是謂伐德。
飲酒孔嘉，維其令儀。

When the guests have drunk too much,
They shout out and brawl.
They disorder the dishes;
They keep dancing in a fantastic manner.
Thus when they have drunk too much,
They become insensible of their errors.
With their caps on one side, and like to fall off,
They keep dancing and will not stop.
If, when they have drunk too much, they went out,
Both they [and their host] would be happy;
But remaining after they are drunk,
Is what is called doing injury to virtue.
Drinking is a good institution,
Only when there is good deportment in it.

凡此飲酒，或醉或否，既立之監，或佐之史。
彼醉不臧，不醉反恥。式勿從謂，無俾大怠。
匪言勿言，匪由勿語，由醉之言，俾出童羖。
三爵不識，矧敢多又。

On every occasion of drinking,
Some get drunk, and some do not.
An inspector is appointed,
With a recorder to assist him.
But those drunkards, in their vileness,
Are shamed of those who do not get drunk.
These have no opportunity to speak,
And prevent the others from proceeding to such great abandonment.
[They might say], ' Do not speak what you ought not to speak;
Do not say what you have no occasion to say,
If you speak, drunk as you are,
We will make you produce a ram without horns.
With three cups you lose your memories; -
How dare you go on to more? '


《賓之初筵》，五章，章十四句。


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge