毛詩序：「《斯干》，宣王考室也。」


斯干
秩秩斯干，幽幽南山。如竹苞矣，如松茂矣。
兄及弟矣，式相好矣，無相猶矣。

By the graceful sweep of these banks,
With the southern hill, so calm in the distance,
[Has the palace arisen], firm as the roots of a clump of bamboos,
[With its roof] like the luxuriant head of a pine tree.
May the brothers [here],
Be loving among themselves,
And have no schemings against one another!

似續妣祖，築室百堵。
西南其戶，爰居爰處，爰笑爰語。

Having entered into the inheritance of his ancestors,
He has built his chambers, five thousand cubits of walls,
With their doors to the west and to the south.
Here will he reside; here will he sit;
Here will he laugh; here will he talk.

約之閣閣，椓之橐橐。
風雨攸除，鳥鼠攸去，君子攸芋。

They bound the frames for the earth, exactly over one another;
Tuo-tuo went on the pounding; -
Impervious [the walls] to wind and rain,
Offering no cranny to bird or rat.
A grand dwelling is it for our noble lord.

如跂斯翼，如矢斯棘。
如鳥斯革，如翬斯飛。君子攸躋。

Like a man on tip-toe, in reverent expectation;
Like an arrow, flying rapidly;
Like a bird which has changed its feathers;
Like a pheasant on flying wings;
Is the [hall] which our noble lord will ascend.

殖殖其庭，有覺其楹。
噲噲其正，噦噦其冥。君子攸寧。

Level and smooth is the court-yard,
And lofty are the pillars around it.
Pleasant is the exposure of the chamber to the light,
And deep and wide are its recesses; -
Here will our noble lord repose.

下莞上簟，乃安斯寢。乃寢乃興，乃占我夢。
吉夢維何？維熊維羆，維虺維蛇。

On the rush-mat below, and that of fine bamboos above it,
Here may he repose in slumber!
May he sleep and awake,
[Saying] ' Divine for me my dreams.
What dreams are lucky?
They have been of bears and grisly bears;
They have been of cobras and [other] serpents. '

大人占之，維熊維羆，男子之祥。
維虺維蛇，女子之祥。

The chief diviner will divine them.
The bears and grisly bears,
Are the auspicious intimations of sons.
The cobras and [other] serpents,
Are the auspicious intimations of daughters.

乃生男子，載寢之牀。載衣之裳，載弄之璋。
其泣喤喤，朱芾斯皇，室家君王。

Sons shall be born to him:
They will be put to sleep on couches;
They will be clothed in robes;
They will have sceptres to play with;
Their cry will be loud.
They will be [hereafter] resplendent with red knee-covers,
The [future] king, the princes of the land.

乃生女子，載寢之地。載衣之裼，載弄之瓦。
無非無儀，唯酒食是議，無父母詒罹。

Daughters shall be born to him:
They will be put to sleep on the ground;
They will be clothed with wrappers;
They will have tiles to play with.
It will be theirs neither to do wrong nor to do good.
Only about the spirits and the food will they have to think,
And to cause no sorrow to their parents.

《斯干》，九章：四章，章七句；五章，章五句。


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge