毛詩序：「《文王》，文王受命作周也。」


文王
文王在上，於昭于天。周雖舊邦，其命維新。
有周不顯，帝命不時。文王陟降，在帝左右。

King Wen is on high;
Oh! bright is he in heaven.
Although Zhou was an old country,
The [favouring] appointment lighted on it recently.
Illustrious was the House of Zhou,
And the appointment of God came at the proper season.
King Wen ascends and descends,
On the left and the right of God.

亹亹文王，令聞不已。陳錫哉周，侯文王孫子。
文王孫子，本支百世。凡周之士，不顯亦世。

Full of earnest activity was king Wen,
And his fame is without end.
The gifts [of God] to Zhou,
Extend to the descendants of king Wen; -
To the descendants of king Wen,
In the direct line and the collateral branches for a hundred generations.
All the officers of Zhou,
Shall [also] be illustrious from age to age.

世之不顯，厥猶翼翼。思皇多士，生此王國。
王國克生，維周之楨。濟濟多士，文王以寧。

They shall be illustrious from age to age,
Zealously and reverently pursuing their plans.
Admirable are the many officers,
Born in this royal kingdom.
The royal kingdom is able to produce them, -
The suppporters of [the House of] Zhou.
Numerous is the array of officers,
And by them king Wen enjoys his repose.

穆穆文王，於緝熙敬止。假哉天命，有商孫子。
商之孫子，其麗不億。上帝既命，侯于周服。

Profound was king Wen;
Oh! continuous and bright was his feeling of reverence.
Great is the appointment of Heaven!
There were the descendants of [the sovereigns] of Shang; -
The descendants of the sovereigns of Shang,
Were in number more than hundreds of thousands;
But when God gave the command,
They became subject to Zhou.

侯服于周，天命靡常。殷士膚敏，祼將于京。
厥作祼將，常服黼冔。王之藎臣，無念爾祖。[1]

They became subject to Zhou.
The appointment of Heaven is not constant.
The officers of Yin, admirable and alert,
Assist at the libations in [our] capital; -
They assist at those libations,
Always wearing the hatchets on their lower garment and their peculiar cap.
O ye loyal ministers of the king,
Ever think of your ancestor!

無念爾祖，聿脩厥德。永言配命，自求多福。
殷之未喪師，克配上帝。宜鑒于殷，駿命不易。

Ever think of your ancestor,
Cultivating your virtue,
Always striving to accord with the will [of Heaven].
So shall you be seeking for much happiness.
Before Yin lost the multitudes,
[Its kings] were the assessors fo God.
Look to Yin as a beacon;
The great appointment is not easily [preserved].

命之不易，無遏爾躬。宣昭義問，有虞殷自天。
上天之載，無聲無臭。儀刑文王，萬邦作孚。

The appointment is not easily [preserved],
Do not cause your own extinction.
Display and make bright your righteousness and name,
And look at [the fate of] Yin in the light of Heaven.
The doings of High Heaven,
Have neither sound nor smell.
Take your pattern from king Wen,
And the myriad regions will repose confidence in you.


《文王》，七章，章八句。

註解
 冔，一作𠳲。


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge