蠱，元亨，利涉大川。先甲三日，後甲三日。
Gu indicates great progress and success (to him who deals properly with the condition represented by it). There will be advantage in (efforts like that of) crossing the great stream. (He should weigh well, however, the events of) three days before the turning point, and those (to be done) three days after it.

彖曰：蠱，剛上而柔下，巽而止，蠱。蠱，元亨，而天下治也。利涉大川，往有事也。先甲三日，後甲三日，終則有始，天行也。
In Gu we have the strong (trigram) above, and the weak one below; we have (below) pliancy, and (above) stopping: - these give the idea of Gu (a Troublous Condition of affairs verging to ruin). 'Gu indicates great progress and success:' - (through the course shown in it), all under heaven, there will be good order. 'There will be advantage in crossing the great stream:' - he who advances will encounter the business to be done. '(He should weigh well, however, the events of) three days before (the turning-point), and those (to be done) three days after it:' - the end (of confusion) is the beginning (of order); such is the procedure of Heaven.

象曰：山下有風，蠱；君子以振民育德。
(The trigram for) a mountain, and below it that for wind, form Gu. The superior man, in accordance with this, (addresses himself to) help the people and nourish his own virtue.

初六：幹父之蠱，有子考，无咎，厲終吉。
The first SIX, divided, shows (a son) dealing with the troubles caused by his father. If he be an (able) son, the father will escape the blame of having erred. The position is perilous, but there will be good fortune in the end.

象曰：幹父之蠱，意承考也。
'He deals with the troubles caused by his father:' - he feels that he has entered into the work of his father.

九二：幹母之蠱，不可貞。
The second NINE, undivided, shows (a son) dealing with the troubles caused by his mother. He should not (carry) his firm correctness (to the utmost).

象曰：幹母之蠱，得中道也。
'He deals with the troubles caused by his mother:' - he holds to the course of the due mean.

九三：幹父之蠱，小有悔，无大咎。
The third NINE, undivided, shows (a son) dealing with the troubles caused by his father. There may be some small occasion for repentance, but there will not be any great error.

象曰：幹父之蠱，終无咎也。
'He deals with the troubles caused by his father:' - in the end there will be no error.

六四：裕父之蠱，往見吝。
The fourth SIX, divided, shows (a son) viewing indulgently the troubles caused by his father. If he go forward, he will find cause to regret it.

象曰：裕父之蠱，往未得也。
'He views indulgently the troubles caused by his father:' - if he go forward, he will not succeed.

六五：幹父之蠱，用譽。
The fifth SIX, divided, shows (a son) dealing with the troubles caused by his father. He obtains the praise of using (the fit instrument for his work).

象曰：幹父用譽，承以德也。
'He deals with the troubles caused by his father, and obtains praise:' - he is responded to (by the subject of line two) with all his virtue.

上九：不事王侯，高尚其事。
The sixth NINE, undivided, shows us one who does not serve either king or feudal lord, but in a lofty spirit prefers (to attend to) his own affairs.

象曰：不事王侯，志可則也。
'He does not serve either king or feudal lord:' - but his aim may be a model (to others).


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882