兌下乾上

履虎尾，不咥人，亨。
(Lu suggests the idea of) one treading on the tail of a tiger, which does not bite him. There will be progress and success.

彖曰：履，柔履剛也。說而應乎乾，是以履虎尾，不咥人，亨。剛中正，履帝位而不疚，光明也。
In Lu we have (the symbol of) weakness treading on (that of) strength. (The lower trigram) indicates pleasure and satisfaction, and responds to (the upper) indicating strength. Hence (it is said), 'He treads on the tail of a tiger, which does not bite him; there will be progress and success.' (The fifth line is) strong, in the centre, and in its correct place. (Its subject) occupies the God-(given) position, and falls into no distress or failure; - (his) action will be brilliant.

象曰：上天下澤，履；君子以辯上下，定民志。
(The trigram representing) the sky above, and below it (that representing the waters of) a marsh, form Lu. The superior man, in accordance with this, discriminates between high and low, and gives settlement to the aims of the people.

初九，素履，往无咎。
The first NINE, undivided, shows its subject treading his accustomed path. If he go forward, there will be no error.

象曰：素履之往，獨行願也。
'He treads his accustomed path and goes forward:' - singly and exclusively he carries out his (long-cherished) wishes.

九二，履道坦坦，幽人貞吉。
The second NINE, undivided, shows its subject treading the path that is level and easy - a quiet and solitary man, to whom, if he be firm and correct, there will be good fortune.

象曰：幽人貞吉，中不自亂也。
'A quiet and solitary man, to whom, being firm and correct, there will be good fortune:' - holding the due mean, he will not allow himself to be thrown into disorder.

六三，眇能視，跛能履，履虎尾，咥人，凶。武人為于大君。
The third SIX, divided, shows a one-eyed man (who thinks he) can see; a lame man (who thinks he) can walk well; one who treads on the tail of a tiger and is bitten. (All this indicates) ill fortune. We have a (mere) bravo acting the part of a great ruler.

象曰：眇能視，不足以有明也。跛能履，不足以與行也。咥人之凶，位不當也。武人為于大君，志剛也。
'A one-eyed man (who thinks that he) can see:' - he is not fit to see clearly. 'A lame man (who thinks that he can) tread well:' - one cannot walk along with him. 'The ill fortune of being bitten' arises from the place not being the proper one for him. 'A (mere) bravo acting the part of a great ruler:' - this is owing to his aims being (too) violent.

九四，履虎尾，愬愬終吉。
The fourth NINE, undivided, shows its subject treading on the tail of a tiger. He becomes full of apprehensive caution, and in the end there will be good fortune.

象曰：愬愬終吉，志行也。
'He becomes full of apprehensive caution, and in the end there will be good fortune:' - his aim takes effect.

九五，夬履，貞厲。
The fifth NINE, undivided, shows the resolute tread of its subject. Though he be firm and correct, there will be peril.

象曰：夬履貞厲，位正當也。
'He treads resolutely; and though he be firm and correct, there is peril:' - this is due to his being in the position that is correct and appropriate to him.

上九，視履考祥，其旋元吉。
The sixth NINE, undivided, tells us to look at (the whole course) that is trodden, and examine the presage which that gives. If it be complete and without failure, there will be great good fortune.

象曰：元吉在上，大有慶也。
'There will be great good fortune,' and that in the occupancy of the topmost line: - this is great matter for congratulation.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882