巽下兌上

大過，棟橈，利有攸往，亨。
Da Guo suggests to us a beam that is weak. There will be advantage in moving (under its conditions) in any direction whatever; there will be success.

彖曰：大過，大者過也。棟橈，本末弱也。剛過而中，巽而說行，利有攸往，乃亨。大過之時義大矣哉！
Da Guo shows the great ones (= the undivided lines) in excess. In 'the beam that is weak' we see weakness both in the lowest and the topmost (lines). The strong lines are in excess, but (two of them) are in the central positions. The action (of the hexagram is represented by the symbols of) flexibility and satisfaction. (Hence it is said), 'There will be advantage in moving in any direction whatever; yea, there will be success. ' Great indeed is (the work to be done in) this very extraordinary time.

象曰：澤滅木，大過。君子以獨立不懼，遯世无悶。
(The trigram representing) trees hidden beneath that for the waters of a marsh forms Da Guo. The superior man, in accordance with this, stands up alone and has no fear, and keeps retired from the world without regret.

初六：藉用白茅，无咎。
The first SIX, divided, shows one placing mats of the white m?o grass under things set on the ground. There will be no error.

象曰：藉用白茅，柔在下也。
'He places mats of the white m?o grass under things set on the ground:' - he feels his weakness and his being in the lowest place, (and uses extraordinary care).

九二：枯楊生稊，老夫得其女妻，无不利。
The second NINE, undivided, shows a decayed willow producing shoots, or an old husband in possession of his young wife. There will be advantage in every way.

象曰：老夫女妻，過以相與也。
'An old husband and a young wife:' - such association is extraordinary.

九三：棟橈，凶。
The third NINE, undivided, shows a beam that is weak. There will be evil.

象曰：棟橈之凶，不可以有輔也。
'The evil connected with the beam that is weak' arises from this, that no help can be given (to the condition thus represented).

九四：棟隆，吉。有它吝。
The fourth NINE, undivided, shows a beam curving upwards. There will be good fortune. If (the subject of it) looks for other (help but that of line one), there will be cause for regret.

象曰：棟隆之吉，不橈乎下也。
'The good fortune connected with the beam curving upwards' arises from this, that it does not bend towards what is below.

九五：枯楊生華，老婦得士夫，无咎无譽。
The fifth NINE, undivided, shows a decayed willow producing flowers, or an old wife in possession of her young husband. There will be occasion neither for blame nor for praise.

象曰：枯楊生華，何可久也。老婦士夫，亦可丑也。
'A decayed willow produces flowers:' - but how can this secure its long continuance? 'An old wife and a young husband:' - this also is a thing to be ashamed of.

上六：過涉滅頂，凶，无咎。
The topmost SIX, divided, shows its subject with extraordinary (boldness) wading through a stream, till the water hides the crown of his head. There will be evil, but no ground for blame.

象曰：過涉之凶，不可咎也。
'Evil follows wading with (extraordinary) boldness (through the stream):' - but (the act) affords no ground for blame.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882