巽下坎上

井，改邑不改井，无喪无得，往來井井。汔至，亦未繘井，羸其瓶，凶。
(Looking at) Jing, (we think of) how (the site of) a town may be changed, while (the fashion of) its wells undergoes no change. (The water of a well) never disappears and never receives (any great) increase, and those who come and those who go can draw and enjoy the benefit. If (the drawing) have nearly been accomplished, but, before the rope has quite reached the water, the bucket is broken, this is evil.

彖曰：巽乎水而上水，井；井養而不窮也。改邑不改井，乃以剛中也。汔至亦未繘井，未有功也。羸其瓶，是以凶也。
(We have the symbol of) wood in the water and the raising of the water; which (gives us the idea of) a well. A well supplies nourishment and is not (itself) exhausted. 'The site of a town may be changed, while the fashion of its wells undergoes no change:' - this is indicated by the central position of the strong lines (in the second and fifth places). 'The drawing is nearly accomplished, but the rope has not yet reached the water of the well:' - its service has not yet been accomplished. 'The bucket is broken:' - it is this that occasions evil.

象曰：木上有水，井；君子以勞民勸相。
(The trigram representing) wood and above it that for water form Jing. The superior man, in accordance with this, comforts the people, and. stimulates them to mutual helpfulness.

初六：井泥不食，舊井无禽。
The first SIX, divided, shows a well so muddy that men will not drink of it; or an old well to which neither birds (nor other creatures) resort.

象曰：井泥不食，下也。舊井无禽，時舍也。
'A well so muddy that men will not drink of it:' - this is indicated by the low position (of the line). 'An old well to which the birds do not come:' - it has been forsaken in the course of time.

九二：井谷射鮒，瓮敝漏。
The second NINE, undivided, shows a well from which by a hole the water escapes and flows away to the shrimps (and such small creatures among the grass), or one the water of which leaks away from a broken basket.

象曰：井谷射鮒，无與也。
'A well from which by a hole the water escapes, and flows away to the shrimps:' - (the subject of this second line has) none co-operating with him (above).

九三：井渫不食，為我民惻，可用汲，王明，并受其福。
The third NINE, undivided, shows a well, which has been cleared out, but is not used. Our hearts are sorry for this, for the water might be drawn out and used. If the king were (only) intelligent, both he and we might receive the benefit of it.

象曰：井渫不食，行惻也。求王明，受福也。
'The well has been cleared out, but is not used:' - (even) passers-by would be sorry for this. A prayer is made 'that the king were intelligent:' - for then blessing would be received.

六四：井甃，无咎。
The fourth SIX, divided, shows a well, the lining of which is well laid. There will be no error.

象曰：井甃无咎，修井也。
'A well the lining of which is well laid. There will be no error:' - the well has been put in good repair.

九五：井冽，寒泉食。
The fifth NINE, undivided, shows a clear, limpid well, (the waters from) whose cold spring are (freely) drunk.

象曰：寒泉之食，中正也。
'The waters from the cold spring are (freely) drunk:' - this is indicated by the central and correct position (of the line).

上六：井收勿幕，有孚无吉。
The topmost SIX, divided, shows (the water from) the well brought to the top, which is not allowed to be covered. This suggests the idea of sincerity. There will be great good fortune.

象曰：元吉在上，大成也。
'The great good fortune' at the topmost place indicates the grand accomplishment (of the idea in the hexagram).


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882