艮下巽上

漸，女歸吉，利貞。
Jian suggests to us the marriage of a young lady, and the good fortune (attending it). There will be advantage in being firm and correct.

彖曰：漸之進也，女歸吉也。進得位，往有功也。進以正，可以正邦也。其位剛，得中也。止而巽，動不窮也。
The advance indicated by Jian is (like) the marrying of a young lady which is attended by good fortune. (The lines) as they advance get into their correct places: - this indicates the achievements of a successful progress. The advance is made according to correctness: - (the subject of the hexagram) might rectify his country. Among the places (of the hexagram) we see the strong undivided line in the centre. 'In (the attributes of) restfulness and flexible penetration we have (the assurance of) an (onward) movement that is inexhaustible.

象曰：山上有木，漸；君子以居賢德，善俗。
(The trigram representing) a mountain and above it that for a tree form Jian. The superior man, in accordance with this, attains to and maintains his extraordinary virtue, and makes the manners of the people good.

初六：鴻漸于干，小子厲，有言，无咎。
The first SIX, divided, shows the wild geese gradually approaching the shore. A young officer (in similar circumstances) will be in a position of danger, and be spoken against; but there will be no error.

象曰：小子之厲，義无咎也。
'The danger of a small officer (as represented in the first line)' is owing to no fault of his in the matter of what is right.

六二：鴻漸于磐，飲食衎衎，吉。
The second SIX, divided, shows the geese gradually approaching the large rocks, where they eat and drink joyfully and at ease. There will be good fortune.

象曰：飲食衎衎，不素飽也。
'They eat and drink joyfully and at ease:' - but not without having earned their food.

九三：鴻漸于陸，夫征不復，婦孕不育，凶；利御寇。
The third NINE, undivided, shows them gradually advanced to the dry plains. (It suggests also the idea of) a husband who goes on an expedition from which he does not return, and of a wife who is pregnant, but will not nourish her child. There will be evil. (The case symbolised) might be advantageous in resisting plunderers.

象曰：夫征不復，離群丑也。婦孕不育，失其道也。利用御寇，順相保也。
'A husband goes and does not return:' - he separates himself from his comrades. 'A wife is pregnant, but will not nourish her child:' - she has failed in her (proper) course. 'It might be advantageous in resisting plunderers:' - by acting as here indicated men would preserve one another.

六四：鴻漸于木，或得其桷，无咎。
The fourth SIX, divided, shows the geese gradually advanced to the trees. They may light on the flat branches. There will be no error.

象曰：或得其桷，順以巽也。
'They may light on the flat branches:' - there is docility (in the line) going on to flexible penetration.

九五：鴻漸于陵，婦三歲不孕，終莫之勝，吉。
The fifth NINE, undivided, shows the geese gradually advanced to the high mound. (It suggests the idea of) a wife who for three years does not become pregnant; but in the end the natural issue cannot be prevented. There will be good fortune.

象曰：終莫之勝，吉；得所愿也。
'In the end the natural issue cannot be prevented. There will be good fortune:' - (the subject of the line) will get what he desires.

上九：鴻漸于逵，其羽可用為儀，吉。
The sixth NINE, undivided, shows the geese gradually advanced to the large heights (beyond). Their feathers can be used as ornaments. There will be good fortune.

象曰：其羽可用為儀，吉；不可亂也。
'Their feathers can be used as ornaments. There will be good fortune:' - (the object and character of the subject of the line) cannot be disturbed.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882