坎下兌上

困，亨，貞大人吉，无咎，有言不信。
In (the condition denoted by) Kun there may (yet be) progress and success. For the firm and correct, the (really) great man, there will be good fortune. He will fall into no error. If he make speeches, his words cannot be made good.

彖曰：困，剛掩也。險以說，困而不失其所，亨；其唯君子乎？ 貞大人吉，以剛中也。有言不信，尚口乃窮也。
In Kun (we see) the strong (lines) covered and obscured (by the weak). We have in it (the attribute of) perilousness going on to that of satisfaction. Who is it but the superior man that, though straitened, still does not fail in making progress to his proper end? 'For the firm and correct, the (really) great man, there will be good fortune:' - this is shown by the central positions of the strong (lines). 'If he make speeches, his words cannot be made good:' - to be fond of arguing or pleading is the way to be reduced to extremity.

象曰：澤无水，困；君子以致命遂志。
(The trigram representing) a marsh, and (below it that for a defile, which has drained the other dry so that there is) no water in it, form Kun. The superior man, in accordance with this, will sacrifice his life in order to carry out his purpose.

初六：臀困于株木，入于幽谷，三歲不見。
The first SIX, divided, shows its subject with bare buttocks straitened under the stump of a tree. He enters a dark valley, and for three years has no prospect (of deliverance).

象曰：入于幽谷，幽不明也。
'He enters a dark valley:' - so benighted is he, and without clear vision.

九二：困于酒食，朱紱方來，利用亨祀，征凶，无咎。
The second NINE, undivided, shows its subject straitened amidst his wine and viands. There come to him anon the red knee-covers (of the ruler). It will be well for him (to maintain his sincerity as) in sacrificing. Active operations (on his part) will lead to evil, but he will be free from blame.

象曰：困于酒食，中有慶也。
'He is straitened amidst his wine and viands:' - (but) his position is central, and there will be ground for congratulation.

六三：困于石，據于蒺藜，入于其宮，不見其妻，凶。
The third SIX, divided, shows its subject straitened before a (frowning) rock. He lays hold of thorns. He enters his palace, and does not see his wife. There will be evil.

象曰：據于蒺藜，乘剛也。入于其宮，不見其妻，不祥也。
'He lays hold of thorns:' - (this is suggested by the position of the line) above the strong (line). 'He enters his palace, and does not see his wife:' - this is inauspicious.

九四：來徐徐，困于金車，吝，有終。
The fourth NINE, undivided shows its subject proceeding very slowly (to help the subject of the first line), who is straitened by the carriage adorned with metal in front of him. There will be occasion for regret, but the end will be good.

象曰：來徐徐，志在下也。雖不當位，有與也。
'He proceeds very slowly (to help the subject of the first line):' - his aim is directed to (help) that lower (line). Although he is not in his appropriate place, he and that other will (in the end) be together.

九五：劓刖，困于赤紱，乃徐有說，利用祭祀。
The fifth NINE, undivided, shows its subject with his nose and feet cut off. He is straitened by (his ministers in their) scarlet aprons. He is leisurely in his movements, however, and is satisfied. It will be well for him to be (as sincere) as in sacrificing (to spiritual beings).

象曰：劓刖，志未得也。乃徐有說，以中直也。利用祭祀，受福也。
'His nose and feet are cut off:' - his aim has not yet been gained. 'He is leisurely, however, in his movements, and is satisfied:' - his position is central and (his virtue) is correct. 'It will be well for him to be (as sincere as) in sacrificing:' - so shall he receive blessing.

上六：困于葛藟，于臲甈，曰動悔。有悔，征吉。
The sixth SIX, divided, shows its subject straitened, as if bound with creepers; or n a high and dangerous position, and saying (to himself), 'If I move, I shall repent it.' If he do repent of former errors, there will be good fortune in his going forward.

象曰：困于葛藟，未當也。動悔，有悔吉，行也。
'He is straitened as if bound with creepers: (his spirit and action) are unsuitable. '(He says), "If I move, I shall repent of it." And he does repent (of former errors), which leads to good fortune:' - so he (now) goes on.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882