乾下兌上

夬，揚于王庭，孚號，有厲，告自邑，不利即戎，利有攸往。
Guai requires (in him who would fulfil its meaning) the exhibition (of the culprit's guilt) in the royal court, and a sincere and earnest appeal (for sympathy and support), with a consciousness of the peril (involved in cutting off the criminal). He should (also) make announcement in his own city, and show that it will not be well to have recourse at once to arms. (In this way) there will be advantage in whatever he shall go forward to.

彖曰：夬，決也，剛決柔也。健而說，決而和，揚于王庭，柔乘五剛也。孚號有厲，其危乃光也。告自邑，不利即戎，所尚乃窮也。利有攸往，剛長乃終也。
Guai is the symbol of displacing or removing. We see (in the figure) the strong (lines) displacing the weak. (We have in it the attributes of) strength and complacency. There is displacement, but harmony (continues). 'The exhibition (of the criminal's guilt) in the royal courtyard' is suggested by the (one) weak (line) mounted on the five strong lines. There 'is an earnest and sincere appeal (for sympathy and support), and a consciousness of the peril (involved in the undertaking):' - it is the realisation of this danger, which makes the method (of compassing the object) brilliant. 'He should make an announcement in his own city, and show that it will not be well to have recourse at once to arms:' - (if he have recourse to arms), what he prefers will (soon) be exhausted. 'There will be advantage in whatever he shall go forward to:' - when the growth of the strong (lines) has been completed, there will be an end (of the displacement).

象曰：澤上于天，夬；君子以施祿及下，居德則忌。
(The trigram representing) heaven and that for the waters of a marsh mounting above it form Guai. The superior man, in accordance with this, bestows emolument on those below him, and dislikes allowing his gifts to accumulate (undispensed).

初九：壯于前趾，往不勝為吝。
The first NINE, undivided, shows its subject in (the pride of) strength advancing with his toes. He goes forward, but will not succeed. There will be ground for blame.

象曰：不勝而往，咎也。
'Without (being able to) succeed, he goes forward:' - this is an error.

九二：惕號，莫夜有戎，勿恤。
The second NINE, undivided, shows its subject full of apprehension and appealing (for sympathy and help). Late at night hostile measures may be (taken against him), but he need not be anxious about them.

象曰：莫夜有戎，得中道也。
'Though hostile measures be taken against him, he need not be anxious:' - he pursues the course of the due mean.

九三：壯于頄，有凶。君子夬夬，獨行遇雨，若濡有慍，无咎。
The third NINE, undivided, shows its subject (about to advance) with strong (and determined) looks. There will be evil. (But) the superior man, bent on cutting off (the criminal), will walk alone and encounter the rain, (till he be hated by his proper associates) as if he were contaminated (by the others). (In the end) there will be no blame against him.

象曰：君子夬夬，終无咎也。
'The superior man looks bent on cutting off the culprit:' - there will in the end be no error.

九四：臀无膚，其行次且。牽羊悔亡，聞言不信。
The fourth NINE, undivided, shows one from whose buttocks the skin has been stripped, and who walks slowly and with difficulty. (If he could act) like. a sheep led (after its companions), occasion for repentance would disappear. But though he hear these words, he will not believe them.

象曰：其行次且，位不當也。聞言不信，聰不明也。
'He walks slowly and with difficulty:' - he is not in the place appropriate to him. 'He hears these words, but does not believe them:' - he hears, but does not understand.

九五：莧陸夬夬，中行无咎。
The fifth NINE, undivided, shows (the small men like) a bed of purslain, which ought to be uprooted with the utmost determination. (The subject of the line having such determination), his action, in harmony with his central position, will lead to no error or blame.

象曰：中行无咎，中未光也。
'If his action be in harmony with his central position, there will be no error:' - but his standing in the due mean is not yet clearly displayed.

上六：无號，終有凶。
The sixth SIX, divided, shows its subject without any (helpers) on whom to call. His end will be evil.

象曰：无號之凶，終不可長也。
'There is the misery of having none on whom to call:' - the end will be that he cannot continue any longer.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882