離下震上

豐，亨。王假之，勿憂，宜日中。
Feng intimates progress and development. When a king has reached the point (which the name denotes) there is no occasion to be anxious (through fear of a change). Let him be as the sun at noon.

彖曰：豐，大也。明以動，故豐。王假之，尚大也。勿憂宜日中，宜照天下也。日中則昃，月盈則食，天地盈虛，與時消息，而況於人乎？況於鬼神乎？
Feng has the signification of being great. It is made up of the trigrams (representing) intelligence and movement directed by that intelligence. It is thus that it has that signification. 'The king has reached the condition (denoted by Feng):' - he has still to make it greater. 'There is no occasion to be anxious. Let him be as the sun at noon:' - it is for him to cause his light to shine on all under the sky. When the sun has reached the meridian height, it begins to decline. When the moon has become full, it begins to wane. The (interaction of) heaven and earth is now vigorous and abundant, now dull and scanty, growing and diminishing according to the seasons. How much more must it be so with (the operations of) men! How much more also with the spiritual agency!

象曰：雷電皆至，豐；君子以折獄致刑。
(The trigrams representing) thunder and lightning combine to form Feng. The superior man, in accordance with this, decides cases of litigation, and apportions punishments with exactness.

初九：遇其配主，雖旬无咎，往有尚。
The first NINE, undivided, shows its subject meeting with his mate. Though they are both of the same character, there will be no error. Advance will call forth approval.

象曰：雖旬无咎，過旬災也。
'Though they are both of the same character, there will be no error:' - if the subject of this line seek to overpass that similarity, there will be calamity.

六二：豐其蔀，日中見斗，往得疑疾，有孚發若，吉。
The second SIX, divided, shows its subject surrounded by screens so large and thick that at midday he can see from them the constellation of the Bushel. If he go (and try to enlighten his ruler who is thus emblemed), he will make himself to be viewed with suspicion and dislike. Let him cherish his feeling of sincere devotion that he may thereby move (his ruler's mind), and there will be good fortune.

象曰：有孚發若，信以發志也。
'Let him cherish his feeling of sincere devotion, that it shall appear being put forth:' - it is by sincerity that the mind is affected.

九三：豐其沛，日中見昧，折其右肱，无咎。
The third NINE, undivided, shows its subject with an (additional) screen of a large and thick banner, through which at midday he can see (the small) Mei star. (In the darkness) he breaks his right arm; but there will be no error.

象曰：豐其沛，不可大事也。折其右肱，終不可用也。
'There is an (additional) screen of a large and thick banner:' - great things should not be attempted (in such circumstances). 'He breaks his right arm:' - in the end he will not be fit to be employed.

九四：豐其蔀，日中見斗，遇其夷主，吉。
The fourth NINE, undivided, shows its subject in a tent so large and thick that at midday he can see from it the constellation of the Bushel. But he meets with the subject of the (first) line, undivided like himself. There will be good fortune.

象曰：豐其蔀，位不當也。日中見斗，幽不明也。遇其夷主，吉；行也。
'He is surrounded by a screen large and thick:' - the position of the line is inappropriate. 'At midday he sees the constellation of the Bushel:' - there is darkness and no light. 'He meets with the subject of the line, undivided like himself. There will be good fortune:' - action may be taken.

六五：來章，有慶譽，吉。
The fifth SIX, divided, shows its subject bringing around him the men of brilliant ability. There will be occasion for congratulation and praise. There will be good fortune.

象曰：六五之吉，有慶也。
'The good fortune indicated by the fifth six, (divided),'is the congratulation (that is sure to arise).

上六：豐其屋，蔀其家，窺其戶，闃其无人，三歲不見，凶。
The topmost SIX, divided, shows its subject with his house made large, but only serving as a screen to his household. When he looks at his door, it is still, and there is nobody about it. For three years no one is to be seen. There will be evil.

象曰：豐其屋，天際翔也。窺其戶，闃其无人，自藏也。
'He has made his house large:' - he soars (in his pride) to the heavens. 'He looks at his door, which is still, with no one about it:' - he (only) keeps himself withdrawn from all others.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882