巽下巽上

巽，小亨，利攸往，利見大人。
Xun intimates that (under the conditions which it denotes) there will be some little attainment and progress. There will be advantage in movement onward in whatever direction. It will be advantageous (also) to see the great man.

彖曰：重巽以申命，剛巽乎中正而志行。柔皆順乎剛，是以小亨，利有攸往，利見大人。
The double Xun shows how, in accordance with it, (governmental) orders are reiterated. (We see that) the strong (fifth line) has penetrated into the central and correct place, and the will (of its subject) is being carried into effect; (we see also) the weak (first and fourth lines) both obedient to the strong lines (above them). It is hence said, 'There will be some little attainment and progress. There will be advantage in movement onward in whatever direction. It will be advantageous also to see the great man.'

象曰：隨風，巽；君子以申命行事。
(Two trigrams representing) wind, following each other, form Xun. The superior man, in accordance with this, reiterates his orders, and secures the practice of his affairs.

初六：進退，利武人之貞。
The first SIX, divided, shows its subject (now) advancing, (now) receding. It would be advantageous for him to have the firm correctness of a brave soldier.

象曰：進退，志疑也。利武人之貞，志治也。
'(Now) he advances, (now) he recedes:' - his mind is perplexed. 'It would be advantageous for him to have the firmness of a brave soldier:' - his mind would in that case be well governed.

九二：巽在牀下，用史巫紛若，吉无咎。
The second NINE, undivided, shows the representative of Sun beneath a couch, and employing diviners and exorcists in a way bordering on confusion. There will be good fortune and no error.

象曰：紛若之吉，得中也。
'The good fortune springing from what borders on confusion' is due to the position (of the line) in the centre.

九三：頻巽，吝。
The third NINE, undivided, shows its subject penetrating (only) by violent and repeated efforts. There will be occasion for regret.

象曰：頻巽之吝，志窮也。
'The regret arising from the violent and repeated efforts to penetrate' shows the exhaustion of the will.

六四：悔亡，田獲三品。
The fourth SIX, divided, shows all occasion for repentance (in its subject) passed away. He takes game for its threefold use in his hunting.

象曰：田獲三品，有功也。
'He takes game in his hunting, enough for the threefold use of it:' - he achieves merit.

九五：貞吉悔亡，无不利。无初有終，先庚三日，后庚三日，吉。
The fifth NINE, undivided, shows that with firm correctness there will be good fortune (to its subject). All occasion for repentance will disappear, and all his movements will be advantageous. There may have been no (good) beginning, but there will be a (good) end. Three days before making any changes, (let him give notice of them); and three days after, (let him reconsider them). There will (thus) be good fortune.

象曰：九五之吉，位正中也。
'The good fortune of (the subject of) the fifth NINE, undivided,' is owing to its correct position and its being in the centre.

上九：巽在牀下，喪其資斧，貞凶。
The sixth NINE, undivided, shows the representative of penetration beneath a couch, and having lost the axe with which he executed his decisions. However firm and correct he may (try to) be, there will be evil.

象曰：巽在牀下，上窮也。喪其資斧，正乎凶也。
'The representative of penetration is beneath a couch:' - though occupying the topmost place, his powers are exhausted. 'He has lost the axe with which he executed his decisions:' - though he try to be correct, there will be evil.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882