兌下坎上

節，亨。苦節不可貞。
Jie intimates that (under its conditions) there will be progress and attainment. (But) if the regulations (which it prescribes) be severe and difficult, they cannot be permanent.

彖曰：節，亨，剛柔分，而剛得中。苦節不可貞，其道窮也。說以行險，當位以節，中正以通。天地節而四時成，節以制度，不傷財，不害民。
'Jie intimates progress and attainment:' - the strong and weak (lines) are equally divided, and the strong lines occupy the central places. 'If the regulations (which Jie prescribes) be severe and difficult, they cannot be permanent:' - its course (of action) will in that case come to an end. (We have the feeling of) pleasure and satisfaction directing the course amidst peril. (We have) all regulations controlled (by authority) in its proper place. (We have) free action proceeding from the central and correct position. Heaven and earth observe their regular terms, and we have the four seasons complete. (If rulers) frame their measures according to (the due) regulations, the resources (of the state) suffer no injury, and the people receive no hurt.

象曰：澤上有水，節；君子以制數度，議德行。
(The trigram representing) a lake, and above it that for water, form Jie. The superior man, in accordance with this, constructs his (methods of) numbering and measurement, and discusses (points of) virtue and conduct.

初九：不出戶庭，无咎。
The first NINE, undivided, shows its subject not quitting the courtyard outside his door. There will be no error.

象曰：不出戶庭，知通塞也。
'He does not quit the courtyard outside his door:' - he knows when he has free course and when he is obstructed.

九二：不出門庭，凶。
The second NINE, undivided, shows its subject not quitting the courtyard inside his gate. There will be evil.

象曰：不出門庭，失時極也。
'He does not quit the courtyard inside his gate. There will be evil:' - he loses the time (for action) to an extreme degree.

六三：不節若，則嗟若，无咎。
The third SIX, divided, shows its subject with no appearance of observing the (proper) regulations, in which case we shall see him lamenting. But there will be no one to blame (but himself).

象曰：不節之嗟，又誰咎也。
In 'the lamentation for not observing the (proper) regulations,' who should there be to blame?

六四：安節，亨。
The fourth SIX, divided, shows its subject quietly and naturally (attentive to all) regulations. There will be progress and success.

象曰：安節之亨，承上道也。
'The progress and success of the quiet and natural (attention) to all regulations' is due to the deference which accepts the ways of (the ruler) above.

九五：甘節，吉；往有尚。
The fifth NINE, undivided, shows its subject sweetly and acceptably enacting his regulations. There will be good fortune. The onward progress with them will afford ground for admiration.

象曰：甘節之吉，居位中也。
'The good fortune arising from the regulations enacted sweetly and acceptably' is due to (the line) occupying the place (of authority) and being in the centre.

上六：苦節，貞凶，悔亡。
The topmost SIX, divided, shows its subject enacting regulations severe and difficult. Even with firmness and correctness there will be evil. But though there will be cause for repentance, it will (by and by) disappear.

象曰：苦節貞凶，其道窮也。
'The regulations are severe and difficult. Even with firm correctness there will be evil:' - the course (indicated by the hexagram) is come to an end.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882