坎下坤上

師，貞丈人吉，无咎。
Shi indicates how, in the case which it supposes, with firmness and correctness, and (a leader of) age and experience, there will be good fortune and no error.

彖曰：師，眾也。貞，正也。能以眾正，可以王矣。剛中而應，行險而順，以此毒天下，而民從之，吉又何咎矣。
(The name) Shi describes the multitude (of the host). The 'firmness and correctness' (which the hexagram indicates) refer to (moral) correctness (of aim). When (the mover) is able to use the multitude with such correctness, he may attain to the royal sway. There is (the symbol of) strength in the centre (of the trigram below), and it is responded to (by its proper correlate above). The action gives rise to perils, but is in accordance (with the best sentiments of men). (Its mover) may by such action distress all the country, but the people will follow him; - there will be good fortune, and what error should there be?

象曰：地中有水，師；君子以容民畜衆。
(The trigram representing) the earth and in the midst of it that representing water, form Shi. The superior man, in accordance with this, nourishes and educates the people, and collects (from among them) the multitudes (of the hosts).

初六，師出以律，否臧，凶。
The first SIX, divided, shows the host going forth according to the rules (for such a movement). If these be not good, there will be evil.

象曰：師出以律；失律，凶也。
'The host goes forth according to the rules (for) such a movement:' - if those rules be not observed, there will be evil.

九二，在師中吉，无咎；王三錫命。
The second NINE, undivided, shows (the leader) in the midst of the host. There will be good fortune and no error. The king has thrice conveyed to him the orders (of his favour).

象曰：在師中吉，承天寵也。王三錫命，懷萬邦也。
'He is in the midst of the host, and there will be good fortune:' - he has received the favour of Heaven. 'The king has thrice conveyed to him the orders (of) his favour:' - (the king) cherishes the myriad regions in his heart.

六三，師或輿尸，凶。
The third SIX, divided, shows how the host may, possibly, have many inefficient leaders. There will be evil.

象曰：師或輿尸，大无功也。
'The host with the possibility of its having many idle leaders:' - great will be its want of success.

六四，師左次，无咎。
The fourth SIX, divided, shows the host in retreat. There is no error.

象曰：左次无咎，未失常也。
'The host is in retreat; but there is no error:' - there has been no failure in the regular course.

六五，田有禽，利執言，无咎。長子帥師，弟子輿尸，貞凶。
The fifth SIX, divided, shows birds in the fields, which it will be advantageous to seize (and destroy). In that case there will be no error. If the oldest son leads the host, and younger men (idly occupy offices assigned to them), however firm and correct he may be, there will be evil.

象曰：長子帥師，以中行也。弟子輿尸，使不當也。
'The oldest son leads the host:' - its movements are directed by him in accordance with his position in the centre. 'Younger men idly occupy their positions:' - the employment of such men is improper.

上六，大君有命，開國承家，小人勿用。
The topmost SIX, divided, shows the great ruler delivering his charges, (appointing some) to be rulers of states, and others to undertake the headship of clans; but small men should not be employed (in such positions).

象曰：大君有命，以正功也。小人勿用，必亂邦也。
The great ruler delivers his charges:' - thereby he rightly apportions merit. 'Small men should not be employed:' - they are sure to throw the states into confusion.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882