震下坤上

復，亨。出入无疾，朋來无咎。反復其道，七日來復，利有攸往。
Fu indicates that there will be free course and progress (in what it denotes). (The subject of it) finds no one to distress him in his exits and entrances; friends come to him, and no error is committed . He will return and repeat his (proper) course. In seven days comes his return. There will be advantage in whatever direction movement is made.

彖曰：復亨；剛反，動而以順行，是以出入无疾，朋來无咎。反復其道，七日來復，天行也。利有攸往，剛長也。復其見天地之心乎？
'Fu indicates the free course and progress (of what it denotes):' - it is the coming back of what is intended by the undivided line. (Its subject's) actions show movement directed by accordance with natural order. Hence 'he finds no one to distress him in his exits and entrances,' and 'friends come to him, and no error is committed.' 'He will return and repeat his proper course; in seven days comes his return:' - such is the movement of the heavenly (revolution). 'There will be advantage in whatever direction movement is made: - the strong lines are growing and increasing. Do we not see in Fu the mind of heaven and earth?

象曰：雷在地中，復；先王以至日閉關，商旅不行，后不省方。
(The trigram representing) the earth and that for thunder in the midst of it form Fu. The ancient kings, in accordance with this, on the day. of the (winter) solstice, shut the gates of the passes (from one state to another), so that the travelling merchants could not (then) pursue their journeys, nor the princes go on with the inspection of their states.

初九：不復遠，无只悔，元吉。
The first NINE, undivided, shows its subject returning (from an error) of no great extent, which would not proceed to anything requiring repentance. There will be great good fortune.

象曰：不遠之復，以修身也。
'Returning (from an error) of no great extent' is the prelude to the cultivation of the person.

六二：休復，吉。
The second SIX, divided, shows the admirable return (of its subject). There will be good fortune.

象曰：休復之吉，以下仁也。
'The good fortune attendant on the admirable return (of the subject of the second line)' is due to his condescension to the virtuous (subject of the line) below.

六三：頻復，厲无咎。
The third SIX, divided, shows one who has made repeated returns. The position is perilous, but there will be no error.

象曰：頻復之厲，義无咎也。
Notwithstanding 'the perilous position of him who has made many returns,' there will be no error through (his aiming after righteousness).

六四：中行獨復。
The fourth SIX, divided, shows its subject moving right in the centre (among those represented by the other divided lines), and yet returning alone (to his proper path).

象曰：中行獨復，以從道也。
'He moves right in the centre (among those represented by the other divided lines), and yet returns alone:' - his object is to pursue the (proper) path.

六五：敦復，无悔。
The fifth SIX, divided, shows the noble return of its subject. There will be no ground for repentance.

象曰：敦復无悔，中以自考也。
'The noble return, giving no ground for repentance,' is due to (the subject of the line) striving to perfect himself in accordance with his central position.

上六：迷復，凶，有災眚。用行師，終有大敗，以其國君，凶；至于十年，不克征。
The topmost SIX, divided, shows its subject all astray on the subject of returning. There will be evil. There will be calamities and errors. If with his views he put the hosts in motion, the end will be a great defeat, whose issues will extend to the ruler of the state. Even in ten years he will not be able to repair the disaster.

象曰：迷復之凶，反君道也。
'The evil consequent on being all astray on the subject of returning' is because the course pursued is contrary to the proper course for a ruler.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882