兌下離上

睽，小事吉。
Kui indicates that, (notwithstanding the condition of things which it denotes), in small matters there will (still) be good success.

彖曰：睽，火動而上，澤動而下；二女同居，其志不同行；說而麗乎明，柔進而上行，得中而應乎剛；是以小事吉。天地睽，而其事同也；男女睽，而其志通也；萬物睽，而其事類也；睽之時用大矣哉！
In Kui we have (the symbol of) Fire, which, when moved, tends upwards, and that of a Marsh, whose waters, when moved, tend downwards. We have (also the symbols of) two sisters living together, but whose wills do not move in the same direction. (We see how the inner trigram expressive of) harmonious satisfaction is attached to (the outer expressive of) bright intelligence; (we see) the weak line advanced and acting above, and how it occupies the central place, and is responded to by the strong (line below). These indications show that 'in small matters there will (still) be good fortune.' Heaven and earth are separate and apart, but the work which they do is the same. Male and female are separate and apart, but with a common will they seek the same object. There is diversity between the myriad classes of beings, but there is an analogy between their several operations. Great indeed are the phenomena and the results of this condition of disunion and separation.

象曰：上火下澤，睽；君子以同而異。
(The trigram representing) fire above, and that for (the waters of) a marsh below, form Kui. The superior man, in accordance with this, where there is a general agreement, yet admits diversity.

初九：悔亡，喪馬勿逐，自復；見惡人无咎。
The first NINE, undivided, shows that (to its subject) occasion for repentance will disappear. He has lost his horses, but let him not seek for them - they will return of themselves. Should he meet with bad men, he will not err (in communicating with them).

象曰：見惡人，以辟咎也。
'He meets with bad men (and communicates with them):' - (he does so), to avoid the evil of their condemnation.

九二：遇主于巷，无咎。
The second NINE, undivided, shows its subject happening to meet with his lord in a bye-passage. There will be no error.

象曰：遇主于巷，未失道也。
'He happens to meet with his lord in a bye-passage:' - but he has not deviated (for this meeting) from the (proper) course.

六三：見輿曳，其牛掣，其人天且劓，无初有終。
In the third SIX, divided, we see one whose carriage is dragged back, while the oxen in it are pushed back, and he is himself subjected to the shaving of his head and the cutting off of his nose. There is no good beginning, but there will be a good end.

象曰：見輿曳，位不當也。无初有終，遇剛也。
'We see his carriage dragged back:' - this is indicated by the inappropriateness of the position (of the line). 'There is no (good) beginning, but there will be a (good) end:' - this arises from his meeting with the strong (subject of the topmost line).

九四：睽孤，遇元夫，交孚，厲无咎。
The fourth NINE, undivided, shows its subject solitary amidst the (prevailing) disunion. (But) he meets with the good man (represented by the first line), and they blend their sincere desires together. The position is one of peril, but there will be no mistake.

象曰：交孚无咎，志行也。
'They blend their sincere desires together, and there will be no error:' - their (common) aim is carried into effect.

六五：悔亡，厥宗噬膚，往何咎。
The fifth SIX, divided, shows that (to its subject) occasion for repentance will disappear. With his relative (and minister he unites closely and readily) as if he were biting through a piece of skin. When he goes forward (with this help), what error can there be?

象曰：厥宗噬膚，往有慶也。
'With his hereditary minister (he unites closely and easily) as if he were biting through a piece of skin:' - his going forward will afford ground for congratulation.

上九：睽孤， 見豕負涂，載鬼一車， 先張之弧，后說之弧，匪寇婚媾，往遇雨則吉。
The topmost NINE, undivided, shows its subject solitary amidst the (prevailing) disunion. (In the subject of the third line, he seems to) see a pig bearing on its back a load of mud, (or fancies) there is a carriage full of ghosts. He first bends his bow against him, and afterwards unbends it, (for he discovers) that he is not an assailant to injure, but a near relative. Going forward, he shall meet with (genial) rain, and there will be good fortune.	

象曰：遇雨之吉，群疑亡也。
'The good fortune symbolised by meeting with (genial) rain' springs from the passing away of all doubts.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882