震下兌上

隨，元亨，利貞，无咎。
Sui indicates that (under its conditions) there will be great progress and success. But it will be advantageous to be firm and correct. There will (then) be no error.

彖曰：隨，剛來而下柔，動而說，隨。大亨貞，无咎，而天下隨時，隨之時義大矣哉！
In Sui we see the strong (trigram) come and place itself under the weak; we see (in the two) the attributes of movement and pleasure: - this gives (the idea of) Sui. 'There will be great progress and success; and through firm correctness no error:' - all under heaven will be found following at such a time. Great indeed are the time and significance indicated in Sui.

象曰：澤中有雷，隨；君子以嚮晦入宴息。
(The trigram for the waters of) a marsh and (that for) thunder (hidden) in the midst of it form Sui. The superior man in accordance with this, when it is getting towards dark, enters (his house) and rests.

初九：官有渝，貞吉。出門交有功。
The first NINE, undivided, shows us one changing the object of his pursuit; but if he be firm and correct, there will he good fortune. Going beyond (his own) gate to find associates, he will achieve merit.

象曰：官有渝，從正吉也。出門交有功，不失也。
'He is changing the object of his pursuit:' - but if he follow what is correct, there will be good fortune. 'He goes beyond (his own) gate to find associates:' - he will not fail (in the method he pursues).

六二：系小子，失丈夫。
The second SIX, divided, shows us one who cleaves to the little boy, and lets go the man of age and experience.

象曰：系小子，弗兼與也。
'He cleaves to the little boy:' - he cannot be with the two at the same time.

六三：系丈夫，失小子。隨有求得，利居貞。
The third SIX, divided, shows us one who cleaves to the man of age and experience, and lets go. the little boy. Such following will get what it seeks; but it will be advantageous to adhere to what is firm and correct.

象曰：系丈夫，志舍下也。
'He cleaves to the man of age and experience:' - by the decision of his will, he abandons (the youth) below.

九四：隨有獲，貞凶。有孚在道，以明，何咎。
The fourth NINE, undivided, shows us one followed and obtaining (adherents). Though he be firm and correct, there will be evil. If he be sincere (however) in his course, and make that evident, into what error will he fall?

象曰：隨有獲，其義凶也。有孚在道，明功也。
'He is followed and obtains adherents:' - according to the idea (of the hexagram), this is evil. 'He is sincere in his course:' - showing his intelligence, and leading to achievement.

九五：孚于嘉，吉。
The fifth NINE, undivided, shows us (the ruler) sincere in (fostering all) that is excellent. There will be good fortune.

象曰：孚于嘉，吉；位正中也。
'He is sincere in fostering what is excellent:' - his position is correct and in the centre.

上六：拘系之，乃從維之。王用亨于西山。
The topmost SIX, divided, shows us (that sincerity) firmly held and clung to, yea, and bound fast. (We see) the king with it presenting his offerings on the western mountain.

象曰：拘系之，上窮也。
'The sincerity is firmly held and clung to, as shown in the topmost line:' - (the idea of the hexagram) has reached its extreme development.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882