乾下離上

大有，元亨。
Da You indicates that, (under the circumstances which it implies), there will be great progress and success.

彖曰：大有，柔得尊位，大中而上下應之，曰大有。其德剛健而文明，應乎天而時行，是以元亨。
In Da You the weak (line) has the place of honour, is grandly central, and (the strong lines) above and below respond to it. Hence comes its name of Da You (Having what is Great). The attributes (of its component trigrams) are strength and vigour with elegance and brightness. (The ruling line in it) responds to (the ruling line in the symbol of) heaven, and (consequently) its action is (all) at the proper times. In this way (it is said to) indicate great progress and success.

象曰：火在天上，大有；君子以竭惡揚善，順天休命。
(The trigram for) heaven and (that of) fire above it form Da You. The superior man, in accordance with this, represses what is evil and gives distinction to what is good, in sympathy with the excellent Heaven-conferred (nature).

初九：无交害，匪咎，艱則无咎。
In the first NINE, undivided, there is no approach to what is injurious, and there is no error. Let there be a realisation of the difficulty (and danger of the position), and there will be no error (to the end).

象曰：大有初九，无交害也。
This first NINE, (undivided), of Da You shows no approach to what is injurious.

九二：大車以載，有攸往，无咎。
In the second NINE, undivided, we have a large waggon with its load. In whatever direction advance is made, there will be no error.

象曰：大車以載，積中不敗也。
'A large waggon with its load' refers to the (virtue) accumulated (in the subject of the line), so that he will suffer no loss (in the conduct of affairs).

九三：公用亨于天子，小人弗克。
The third NINE, undivided, shows us a feudal prince presenting his offerings to the Son of Heaven. A small man would be unequal (to such a duty).

象曰：公用亨于天子，小人害也。
'A feudal prince presents his offerings to the son of Heaven:' - a small man (in such a position) does (himself) harm.

九四：匪其彭，无咎。
The fourth NINE, undivided, shows its subject keeping his great resources under restraint. There will be no error.

象曰：匪其彭，无咎；明辨晰也。
'He keeps his great resources under restraint:' - his wisdom discriminates clearly (what he ought to do).

六五：厥孚交如，威如；吉。
The fifth SIX, divided, shows the sincerity of its subject reciprocated by that of all the others (represented in the hexagram). Let him display a proper majesty, and there will be good fortune.

象曰：厥孚交如，信以發志也。威如之吉，易而无備也。
'His sincerity is reciprocated by all the others:' - his sincerity serves to stir and call out what is in their minds. 'The good fortune springing from a display of proper majesty' shows how they might (otherwise) feel too easy, and make no preparation (to serve him).

上九：自天佑之，吉无不利。
The topmost NINE, undivided, shows its subject with help accorded to him from Heaven. There will be good fortune, advantage in every respect.

象曰：大有上吉，自天佑也。
'The good fortune attached to the topmost line of Da You' arises from the help of Heaven.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882