艮下離上

旅，小亨，旅貞吉。
Lu intimates that (in the condition which it denotes) there may be some little attainment and progress. If the stranger or traveller be firm and correct as he ought to be, there will be good fortune.

彖曰：旅，小亨，柔得中乎外，而順乎剛，止而麗乎明，是以小亨，旅貞吉也。旅之時義大矣哉！
'Lu indicates that there may be some small attainment and progress:' - the weak (line) occupies the central place in the outer (trigram), and is obedient to the strong (lines on either side of it). (We have also the attributes of quiet) resting closely attached to intelligence (in the component trigrams). Hence it is said, 'There may be some small attainment and progress. If the stranger or traveller be firm and correct as he ought to be, there will be good fortune.' Great is the time and great is the right course to be taken as intimated in Lu!

象曰：山上有火，旅；君子以明慎用刑，而不留獄。
(The trigram representing) a mountain and above it that for fire form Lu. The superior man, in accordance with this, exerts his wisdom and caution in the use of punishments and not allowing litigations to continue.

初六：旅瑣瑣，斯其所取災。
The first SIX, divided, shows the stranger mean and meanly occupied. It is thus that he brings on himself (further) calamity.

象曰：旅瑣瑣，志窮災也。
'The stranger is mean and meanly occupied:' - his aim is become of the lowest character, and calamity will ensue.

六二：旅即次，懷其資，得童僕貞。
The second SIX, divided, shows the stranger, occupying his lodging-house, carrying with him his means of livelihood, and provided with good and trusty servants.

象曰：得童僕貞，終无尤也。
'He is provided with good and trusty servants:' - he will in the end have nothing of which to complain.

九三：旅焚其次，喪其童僕，貞厲。
The third NINE, undivided, shows the stranger, burning his lodging-house, and having lost his servants. However firm and correct he (try to) be, he will be in peril.

象曰：旅焚其次，亦以傷矣。以旅與下，其義喪也。
'The stranger burns his lodging-house:' - and he himself also suffers hurt thereby. When, as a stranger, he treats those below him (as the line indicates), the right relation between him and them is lost.

九四：旅于處，得其資斧，我心不快。
The fourth NINE, undivided, shows the traveller in a resting-place, having (also) the means of livelihood and the axe, (but still saying), 'I am not at ease in my mind.'

象曰：旅于處，未得位也。得其資斧，心未快也。
'The stranger is in a resting-place:' - but he has not got his proper position. 'He has the means of livelihood, and the axe:' - but his mind is not at ease.

六五：射雉一矢亡，終以譽命。
The fifth SIX, divided, shows its subject shooting a pheasant. He will lose his arrow, but in the end he will obtain praise and a (high) charge.

象曰：終以譽命，上逮也。
'In the end he will obtain praise and a (high) charge:' - he has reached a high place.

上九：鳥焚其巢，旅人先笑后號啕。喪牛于易，凶。
The sixth NINE, undivided, suggests the idea of a bird burning its nest. The stranger, (thus represented), first laughs and then cries out. He has lost his ox(-like docility) too readily and easily. There will be evil.

象曰：以旅在上，其義焚也。喪牛于易，終莫之聞也。
'Considering that the stranger is here at the very height (of distinction),' with the spirit that possesses him, it is right he (should be emblemed by a bird) burning (its nest). 'He loses his ox(-like docility) too readily and easily:' - to the end he would not listen to (the truth about the course to be pursued).


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882