震下離上

噬嗑，亨。利用獄。
Shi He indicates successful progress (in the condition of things which it supposes). It will be advantageous to use legal constraints.

彖曰：頤中有物，曰噬嗑，噬嗑而亨。剛柔分，動而明，雷電合而章。柔得中而上行，雖不當位，利用獄也。
The existence of something between the jaws gives rise to the name Shi He (Union by means of biting through the intervening article). The Union by means of biting through the intervening article indicates 'the successful progress (denoted by the hexagram).' The strong and weak (lines) are equally divided (in the figure). Movement is denoted (by the lower trigram), and bright intelligence (by the upper); thunder and lightning uniting in them, and having brilliant manifestation. The weak (fifth) line is in the centre, and acts in its high position. Although it is not in its proper position, this is advantageous for the use of legal constraints.

象曰：雷電噬嗑；先王以明罰敕法。
(The trigrams representing) thunder and lightning form Shi He. The ancient kings, in accordance with this, framed their penalties with intelligence, and promulgated their laws.

初九：屨校滅趾，无咎。
The first NINE, undivided, shows one with his feet in the stocks and deprived of his toes. There will be no error.

象曰：屨校滅趾，不行也。
'His feet are in the stocks, and he is deprived of his toes:' - there is no walking (to do evil).

六二：噬膚滅鼻，无咎。
The second SIX, divided, shows one biting through the soft flesh, and (going on to) bite off the nose. There will be no error.

象曰：噬膚滅鼻，乘剛也。
'He bites through the soft flesh, and (goes on) to bite off the nose:' - (the subject of the line) is mounted on the strong (first line).

六三：噬臘肉，遇毒；小吝，无咎。
The third SIX, divided, shows one gnawing dried flesh, and meeting with what is disagreeable. There will be occasion for some small regret, but no (great) error.

象曰：遇毒，位不當也。
'He meets with what is disagreeable and hurtful:' - his position is not the proper one for him.

九四：噬乾胏，得金矢，利艱貞，吉。
The fourth NINE, undivided, shows one gnawing the flesh dried on the bone, and getting the pledges of money and arrows. It will be advantageous to him to realise the difficulty of his task and be firm,--in which case there will be good fortune.

象曰：利艱貞吉，未光也。
'It will be advantageous to him to realise the difficulty of his task and be firm, in which case there will be good fortune:' - his light has not yet been sufficiently displayed.

六五：噬乾肉，得黃金，貞厲，无咎。
The fifth SIX, divided, shows one gnawing at dried flesh, and finding the yellow gold. Let him be firm and correct, realising the peril (of his position). There will be no error.

象曰：貞厲无咎，得當也。
'Let him be firm and correct, realising the peril (of his position), and there will be no error:' - he will possess every quality appropriate (to his position and task).

上九：何校滅耳，凶。
The sixth NINE, undivided, shows one wearing the cangue, and deprived of his ears. There will be evil.

象曰：何校滅耳，聰不明也。
'He wears the cangue and is deprived of his ears:' - he hears, but will not understand.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: Legge 1882