惟元祀，十有二月，乙丑，伊尹祠于先王。奉嗣王祗見厥祖。侯甸群後咸在。百官總己以聽冢宰。伊尹乃明言烈祖之成德，以訓于王，

In the twelfth month of the first year, on (the day) Yi-chou, Yi Yin sacrificed to the former king, and presented the heir-king reverently before (the shrine of) his grandfather. All the princes from the domain of the nobles and the royal domain were present; all the officers (also), each continuing to discharge his particular duties, were there to receive the orders of the chief minister. Yi Yin then clearly described the complete virtue of the Meritorious Ancestor for the instruction of the (young) king.

曰：「嗚呼！古有夏先后，方懋厥德，罔有天災。山川鬼神，亦莫不寧，暨鳥獸魚鱉咸若。于其子孫弗率，皇天降災，假手于我有命。造攻自鳴條，朕哉自亳。惟我商王，布昭聖武，代虐以寬，兆民允懷。

「今王嗣厥德，罔不在初。立愛惟親，立敬惟長，始于家邦，終于四海。

He said, 'Oh! of old the former kings of Xia cultivated earnestly their virtue, and then there were no calamities from Heaven. The spirits of the hills and rivers likewise were all in tranquillity; and the birds and beasts, the fishes and tortoises, all enjoyed their existence according to their nature. But their descendant did not follow (their example), and great Heaven sent down calamities, employing the agency of our (ruler) who was in possession of its favouring appointment. The attack (on Xia) may be traced to (the orgies in) Ming-tiao, but our (rise) began in Bo. Our king of Shang brilliantly displayed his sagely prowess; for oppression he substituted his generous gentleness; and the millions of the people gave him their hearts. Now your Majesty is entering on the inheritance of his virtue - all depends on (how) you commence your reign. To set up love, it is for you to love (your relations); to set up respect, it is for you to respect (your elders). The commencement is in the family and the state; the consummation is in (all within) the four seas.'

嗚呼！先王肇修人紀，從諫弗咈，先民時若；居上克明，為下克忠；與人不求備，檢身若不及，以至于有萬邦，茲惟艱哉！敷求哲人，俾輔于爾後嗣。制官刑，儆于有位。曰：『敢有恒舞于宮、酣歌于室，時謂巫風；敢有殉于貨色、恒于游畋，時謂淫風；敢有侮聖言、逆忠直、遠耆德、比頑童，時謂亂風。』惟茲三風十愆，卿士有一于身，家必喪；邦君有一于身，國必亡。臣下不匡，其刑墨，具訓于蒙士。

'Oh! the former king began with careful attention to the bonds that hold men together. He listened to expostulation, and did not seek to resist it; he conformed to (the wisdom of) the ancients; occupying the highest position, he displayed intelligence; occupying an inferior position, he displayed his loyalty; he allowed (the good qualities of) the men (whom he employed), and did not seek that they should have every talent; in the government of himself, he seemed to think that he could never (sufficiently) attain. It was thus he arrived at the possession of the myriad regions. How painstaking was he in these things! He extensively sought out wise men, who should be helpful to you, his descendant and heir. He laid down the punishments for officers, And warned those who were in authority, saying, "If you dare to have constant dancing in your palaces, and drunken singing in your chambers, that is called the fashion of sorcerers; if you dare, to set your hearts on wealth and women, and abandon yourselves to wandering about or to the chase, that is called the fashion of extravagance; if you dare to despise sage words, to resist the loyal and upright, to put far from you the aged and virtuous, and to seek the company of procacious youths, that is called the fashion of disorder. Now if a high noble or officer be addicted to one of these three fashions with their ten evil ways, his family will surely come to ruin; if the prince of a country be so addicted, his state will surely come to ruin. The minister who does not (try to) correct (such vices in the sovereign) shall be punished with branding." These rules were minutely inculcated (also) on the sons of officers and nobles in their lessons.'

「鳴呼！嗣王祗厥身，念哉！聖謨洋洋，嘉言孔彰。惟上帝不常，作善降之百祥，作不善降之百殃。爾惟德罔小，萬邦惟慶；爾惟不德罔大，墜厥宗。」

'Oh! do you who now succeed to the throne, revere (these warnings) in your person. Think of them!--sacred counsels of vast importance, admirable words forcibly set forth! (The ways) of God are not invariable: on the good-doer he sends down all blessings, and on the evil-doer he sends down all miseries. Do you but be virtuous, be it in small things (or in large), and the myriad regions will have cause for rejoicing. If you be not virtuous, be it in large things (or in small), it will bring the ruin of your ancestral temple.'


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge