羲和湎淫，廢時亂日，胤往征之。作《胤征》。

惟仲康肇位四海，胤侯命掌六師，羲和廢厥職，酒荒于厥邑，胤后承王命徂征。告于眾曰：嗟予有眾！「聖有謨訓。明徵定保。」先王克謹天戒，臣人克有常憲，百官修輔厥后，惟明明。每歲孟春，「遒人以木鐸徇于路，官師相規，工執藝事以諫。」其或不恭，邦有常刑，惟時羲和，顛覆厥德，沈亂于酒。畔（宮）〔官〕離次，俶擾天紀，遐棄厥司。乃季秋月朔，「辰弗集于房，瞽奏鼓，嗇夫馳，庶人走。」羲和尸厥官，罔聞知，昏迷于天象，以干先王之誅。政典曰：「先時者殺無赦，不及時者殺無赦。」今予以爾有眾，奉將天罰。爾眾士同力王室，尚弼予，欽承天子威命。火炎崑岡，玉石俱焚。天吏逸德，烈于猛火。殲厥渠魁，脅從罔治，舊染汙俗，咸與惟新。嗚呼！「威克厥愛，允濟。」愛克厥威，允罔功。其爾眾士，懋戒哉！

When Zhong Kang commenced his reign over all within the four seas, the marquis of Yin was commissioned to take charge of the (king's) six hosts. (At this time) the Xi and He had neglected the duties of their office, and were abandoned to drink in their (private) cities; and the marquis of Yin received the king's charge to go and punish them.
He made an announcement to his hosts, saying, 'Ah! ye, all my men, there are the well-counselled instructions of the sage (founder of our dynasty), clearly verified in their power to give stability and security: "The former kings were carefully attentive to the warnings of Heaven, and their ministers observed the regular laws (of their offices). All the officers (moreover) watchfully did their duty to assist (the government), and their sovereign became entirely intelligent." Every year, in the first month of spring, the herald, with his wooden-tongued bell, goes along the roads, (proclaiming), "Ye officers able to instruct, be prepared with your admonitions. Ye workmen engaged in mechanical affairs, remonstrate on the subjects of your employments. If any of you do not attend with respect (to this requirement), the country has regular punishments for you."
'Now here are the Xi and He. They have allowed their virtue to be subverted, and are besotted by drink. They have violated the duties of their office, and left their posts. They have been the first to let the regulating of the heavenly (bodies) get into disorder, putting far from them their proper business. On the first day of the last month of autumn, the sun and moon did not meet harmoniously in Fang. The blind musicians beat their drums; the inferior officers galloped, and the common people (employed about the public offices) ran about. The Xi and the He, however, as if they were (mere) personators of the dead in their offices, heard nothing and knew nothing - so stupidly went they astray (from their duties) in the matter of the heavenly appearances, and rendered themselves liable to the death appointed by the former kings. The statutes of government say, "When they anticipated the time, let them be put to death without mercy; when (their reckoning) is behind the time, let them be put to death without mercy."
'Now I, with you all, am entrusted with the execution of the punishment appointed by Heaven. Unite your strength, all of you warriors, for the royal House. Give me your help, I pray you, reverently to carry out the dread charge of the Son of Heaven.
'When the fire blazes over the ridge of Kun, gems and stones are burned together; but if a minister of Heaven exceed in doing his duty, the consequences will be fiercer than blazing fire. While I destroy, (therefore), the chief criminals, I will not punish those who have been forced to follow them; and those who have long been stained by their filthy manners will be allowed to renovate themselves.
'Oh! when sternness overcomes compassion, things are surely conducted to a successful issue. When compassion overcomes sternness, no merit can be achieved. All ye, my warriors, exert yourselves, and take warning, (and obey my orders)!'

自契至于成湯八遷，湯始居亳，從先王居。作《帝告》、《釐沃》。

湯征諸侯，葛伯不祀，湯始征之。作《湯征》。

伊尹去亳適夏，既醜有夏，復歸于亳。入自北門，乃遇汝鳩汝方。作《汝鳩》、《汝方》。


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge