太甲既立，不明，伊尹放諸桐。三年復歸于亳，思庸，伊尹作《太甲》三篇。
惟嗣王不惠于阿衡，伊尹作書曰：「先王顧諟天之明命，以承上下神祇。社稷宗廟，罔不祗肅。天監厥德，用集大命，撫綏萬方。惟尹躬克左右厥辟，宅師，肆嗣王丕承基緒。惟尹躬先見于西邑夏，自周有終。相亦惟終；其後嗣王罔克有終，相亦罔終，嗣王戒哉！祗爾厥辟，辟不辟，忝厥祖。」

The king, on succeeding to the throne, did not follow (the advice of) A-heng. (A-heng or) Yi Yin then made the following writing: 'The former king kept his eye continually on the bright requirements of Heaven, and so he maintained the worship of the spirits of heaven and earth, of those presiding over the land and the grain, and of those of the ancestral temple - all with a sincere reverence. Heaven took notice of his virtue, and caused its great appointment to light on him, that he should soothe and tranquillize the myriad regions. I, Yin, then gave my assistance to my sovereign in the settlement of the people; and thus it is that you, O heir-king, have received the great inheritance. I have seen it myself in Xia with its western capital, that when its rulers went through a prosperous course to the end, their ministers also did the same, and afterwards, when their successors could not attain to such a consummation, neither did their ministers. Take warning, O heir-king. Reverently use your sovereignty. If you do not play the sovereign, as the name requires, you will disgrace your grandfather.'

王惟庸罔念聞。伊尹乃言曰：「先王昧爽丕顯，坐以待旦。旁求俊彥，啟迪後人，無越厥命以自覆。慎乃儉德，惟懷永圖。若虞機張，往省括于度則釋。欽厥止，率乃祖攸行，惟朕以懌，萬世有辭。」

The king would not think (of these words), nor listen to them. On this Yi Yin said, 'The former king, before it was light, sought to have large and clear views, and then sat waiting for the dawn (to carry them into practice). He (also) sought on every side for men of ability and virtue, to instruct and guide his posterity. Do not frustrate his charge (to me), and bring on yourself your own overthrow. Be careful to strive after the virtue of self-restraint, and cherish far-reaching plans. Be like the forester, who, when he has adjusted the spring, goes to examine the end of the arrow, whether it be placed according to rule, and then lets I go; reverently determine your aim, and follow the ways of your grandfather. Thus I shall be delighted, and be able to show to all ages that I have discharged my trust.'

王未克變。伊尹曰：「茲乃不義，習與性成。予弗狎于弗順，營于桐宮，密邇先王其訓，無俾世迷。王徂桐宮居憂，克終允德。」

The king was not yet able to change (his course). Yin said (to himself), 'This is (real) unrighteousness, and is becoming by practice (a second) nature. I cannot bear to be near (so) disobedient (a person). I will build (a place) in the palace at Tong, where he can be in silence near (the grave of) the former king. This will be a lesson which will keep him from going astray all his life.' The king went (accordingly) to the palace at Tong, and dwelt during the period of mourning. In the end he became sincerely virtuous.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge