周公拜手稽首曰：「朕復子明辟。王如弗敢及天基命定命，予乃胤保，大相東土，其基作民明辟。予惟乙卯，朝至于洛師。我卜河朔黎水。我乃卜澗水東、瀍水西，惟洛食。我又卜瀍水東，亦惟洛食。伻來以圖，及獻卜。」

The duke of Zhou did obeisance with his hands to his head and his head to the ground, saying 'Herewith I report (the execution of my commission) to my son my intelligent sovereign. The king appeared as if he would not presume to be present at Heaven's founding here the appointment (of our dynasty), and fixing it, whereupon I followed the (Grand-)Guardian, and made a great survey of this eastern region, hoping to found the place where he should become the intelligent sovereign of the people. On the day Yi-mao, I came in the morning to this capital of Luo. I (first) divined by the shell concerning (the ground about) the li-water on the north of the He. I then divined concerning the east of the Jian-water, and the west of the Chan, when the (ground near the) Luo was indicated. Again I divined concerning the east of the Chan-water when the (ground near the) Luo was also indicated. I (now) send a messenger with a map, and to present the (result of the) divinations.'

王拜手稽首曰：「公！不敢不敬天之休，來相宅，其作周匹休。公既定宅，伻來、來，視予卜休恒吉，我二人共貞；公其以予萬億年。敬天之休；拜手稽首誨言。」

The king did obeisance with his hands to his head and his head to the ground, saying, 'The duke did not presume not to acknowledge reverently the favour of Heaven, and has surveyed the locality where our Zhou may respond to that favour. Having settled the locality, he has sent his messenger to show me the divinations, favourable and always auspicious. We two must together sustain the responsibility. He has made provision for me (and my successors), for myriads and tens of myriads of years, there reverently to acknowledge the favour of Heaven. With my hands, to my head and my head to the ground, (I receive) his instructive words.'

周公曰：「王肇稱殷禮，祀于新邑，咸秩無文。予齊百工，伻從王于周；予惟曰：庶有事。今王即命曰：『記功，宗，以功作元祀。』惟命曰：『汝受命篤弼；丕視功載，乃汝其悉自教工。』

The duke of Zhou said, 'Let the king at first employ the ceremonies of Yin, and sacrifice in the new city, doing everything in an orderly way, but without display. I will marshal all the officers to attend you from Zhou, merely saying that probably there will be business to be done (in sacrificing). Let the king instantly issue an order to the effect that the most meritorious (ministers) shall have the first place in the sacrifices; and let him also say in an order, "You, in whose behalf the above order is issued, must give me your assistance with sincere earnestness." Truly display the record of merits, for it is you who must in everything teach the officers.

孺子其朋，孺子其朋，其往。無若火始焰焰，厥攸灼，敘弗其絕。厥若彝及撫事。如予惟以在周工，往新邑。伻向即有僚，明作有功；惇大成裕，汝永有辭。」

My young son, can you indulge partiality? Eschew it, my young son. (If you do not), the consequence hereafter will be like a fire, which, a spark at first, blazes up, and by and by cannot be extinguished. Let your observance of the constant rules of right, and your soothing measures be like mine. Take only the officers that are in Zhou with you to the new city, and make them there join their (old) associates, with intelligent vigour establishing their merit, and with a generous largeness (of soul) completing (the public manners); so shall you obtain an endless fame.'

公曰：「已！汝惟沖子，惟終。汝其敬識百辟享，亦識其有不享。享多儀；儀不及物，惟曰不享。惟不役志于享。凡民惟曰不享，惟事其爽侮。乃惟孺子頒，朕不暇聽。

The duke said, 'Yes, young as you are, be it yours to complete (the work of your predecessors). Cultivate (the spirit of) reverence, and you will know who among the princes (sincerely) present their offerings to you, and who do not. In connexion with those offerings there are many observances. If the observances are not equal to the articles, it must be held that there is no offering. When there is no service of the will in the offerings (of the princes), all the people will then say, "We need not (be troubled about) our offerings," and affairs will be disturbed by errors and usurpations. Do you, my young son, manifest everywhere my unwearied diligence.

朕教汝于棐民彝。汝乃是不蘉，乃時惟不永哉。篤敘乃正父，罔不若；予不敢廢乃命。汝往，敬哉！茲予其明農哉！彼裕我民，無遠用戾。」

And listen to my instructions to you how to help the people to observe the constant rules of right. If you do not bestir yourself in these things, you will not be of long continuance. If you sincerely and fully carry out the course of your Directing father, and follow exactly my example, there will be no venturing to disregard your orders. Go, and be reverent. Henceforth I will study husbandry. There do you generously rule our people, and there is no distance from which they will not come to you.'

王若曰：「公！明保予沖子。公稱丕顯德，以予小子，揚文武烈。奉答天命，和恒四方民，居師。惇宗將禮，稱秩元祀，咸秩無文。惟公德明，光于上下，勤施于四方，旁作穆穆，迓衡不迷文武勤教。予沖子夙夜毖祀。」王曰：「公功棐迪篤，罔不若時。」

The king spoke to this effect: 'O duke, you are the enlightener and sustainer of my youth. You have set forth the great and illustrious virtues, that I, notwithstanding my youth, may display a brilliant merit like that of Wen and Wu, reverently responding to the favouring decree of Heaven; and harmonize and long preserve the people of all the regions, settling the multitudes (in Luo); and that I may give due honour to the great ceremony (of recording) the most distinguished (for their merits), regulating the order for the first places at the sacrifices, and doing everything in an orderly manner without display. But your virtue, O duke, shines brightly above and beneath, and is displayed actively throughout the four quarters. On every hand appears the deep reverence (of your virtue) in securing the establishment of order, so that you fail in nothing of the earnest lessons of Wen and Wu. It is for me, the youth, (only) to attend reverently, early and late, to the sacrifices.' The king said, 'Great, O duke, has been your merit in helping and guiding me; let it ever continue so.'

王曰：「公！予小子其退即辟于周，命公後。四方迪亂未定，于宗禮亦未克敉公功。迪將其後，監我士、師、工，誕保文武受民，亂為四輔。」王曰：「公定，予往已。公功肅將祗歡，公無困哉。我惟無斁，其康事；公勿替刑，四方其世享。」

The king said, 'O duke, let me, the little child, return to my sovereignty in Zhou, and I charge you, O duke, to remain behind (here). Order has been initiated throughout the four quarters of the kingdom, but the ceremonies to be honoured (by general observance) have not yet been settled, and I cannot look on your service as completed. Commence on a great scale what is to be done by your remaining here, setting an example to my officers and greatly preserving the people whom Wen and Wu received; by your good government you will be a help to the whole kingdom.'
The king said, 'Remain, O duke. I will certainly go. Your services are devoutly acknowledged and reverently rejoiced in. Do not, O duke, occasion me this difficulty. I on my part will not be weary in seeking the tranquillity (of the people); do not let the example which you have afforded me be intermitted. So shall the kingdom enjoy for generations (the benefit of your virtue).'

周公拜手稽首曰：「王命予來承保乃文祖受命民；越乃光烈考武王弘朕恭。孺子來相宅，其大惇典殷獻民，亂為四方新辟；作周，恭先。曰其自時中乂，萬邦咸休，惟王有成績。予旦以多子越御事，篤前人成烈，答其師；作周，孚先。考朕昭子刑，乃單文祖德。

The duke of Zhou did obeisance with his hands to his head and his head to the ground, saying, 'You have charged me, O king, to come here. I undertake (the charge), and will protect the people whom your accomplished grandfather, and your glorious and meritorious father, king Wu, received by the decree (of Heaven). I will enlarge the reverence which I cherish for you. (But), my son, come (frequently), and inspect this settlement. Pay great honour to (old) statutes, and to the good and wise men of Yin. Good government (here) will make you (indeed) the new sovereign of the kingdom, and an example of (royal) respectfulness to all your successors of Zhou.' (The duke) proceeded to say, 'From this time, by the government administered in this central spot, all the states will be conducted to repose; and this will be the completion of your merit, O king. I, Tan, with the numerous officers and managers of affairs, will consolidate the achievements of our predecessors, in response to (the hopes of) the people. I will afford an example of sincerity to (future ministers of) Zhou, seeking to render complete the pattern intended for the enlightenment of you, my son, and thus to carry fully out the virtue of your accomplished grandfather.'

伻來毖殷，乃命寧予；以秬鬯二卣，曰：『明禋，拜手稽首休享。』予不敢宿，則禋于文王、武王。惠篤敘，無有遘自疾，萬年厭于乃德，殷乃引考。王伻殷乃承敘，萬年其永觀朕子懷德。」

(Afterwards, on the arrival of a message and gifts from the king, the duke said), '(The king) has sent messengers to admonish (the people of) Yin, and with a soothing charge to me, along with two flagons of the black-millet herb-flavoured spirits, saying, "Here is a pure sacrificial gift, which with my hands to my head and my head to the ground I offer for you to enjoy its excellence!" I dare not keep this by me, but offer it in sacrifice to king Wen and king Wu.' (In doing so, he prayed), 'May he be obedient to, and observant of your course! Let him not bring on himself any evil or illness! Let him satisfy his descendants for myriads of years with your virtue! Let (the people of) Yin enjoy prolonged (prosperity)!' (He also said to the messengers), 'The king has sent you to Yin, and we have received his well-ordered charges, (sufficient to direct us) for myriads of years, but let (the people) ever (be able to) observe the virtue cherished by my son.'

戊辰，王在新邑，烝，祭歲：文王騂牛一，武王騂牛一。王命作冊逸祝冊，惟告周公其後。

On the day Wu-chen, the king, being in the new city, performed the annual winter sacrifice, offering (moreover) one red bull to king Wen and another to king Wu. He then ordered a declaration to be prepared, which was done by Yi in the form of a prayer, and it simply announced the remaining behind of the duke of Zhou.

王賓，殺、禋，咸格，王入太室裸。王命周公後，作冊逸誥，在十有二月，惟周公誕保文武受命，惟七年。

The king's guests, on occasion of the killing of the victims and offering the sacrifice, were all present. The king entered the grand apartment, and poured out the libation. He gave a charge to the duke of Zhou to remain, and Yi, the preparer of the document, made the announcement - in the twelfth month. (Thus) the duke of Zhou grandly sustained the decree which Wen and Wu had received through the space of seven years.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge