微子若曰：「父師、少師，殷其弗或亂正四方。我祖厎遂陳于上；我用沈酗于酒，用亂敗厥德于下。殷罔不小大，好草竊奸宄，卿士師師非度，凡有辜罪，乃罔恒獲。小民方興，相為敵讎。今殷其淪喪，若涉大水，其無津涯。殷遂喪，越至于今。」

The Count of Wei spoke to the following effect: 'Grand-Master and Junior-Master, (the House of) Yin, we may conclude, can no longer exercise rule over the four quarters (of the kingdom). The great deeds of our founder were displayed in former ages, but by our maddened indulgence in spirits, we have destroyed (the effects of) his virtue in these after-times. (The people of) Yin, small and great, are given to highway robberies, villainies, and treachery. The nobles and officers imitate one another in violating the laws, and there is no certainty that criminals will be apprehended. The smaller people (consequently) rise up, and commit violent outrages on one another. Yin is now sinking in ruin - its condition is like that of one crossing a stream, who can find neither ford nor bank. That Yin should be hurrying to ruin at the present pace!'

曰：「父師、少師，我其發出狂？吾家耄遜于荒？今爾無指告予，顛隮若之何其？」

He added, 'Grand-Master and Junior-Master, we are manifesting insanity. The most venerable members of our families are withdrawn to the wilds; and you indicate no course (to be taken), but (only) tell me of the impending ruin - what is to be done?'

父師若曰：「王子！天毒降災荒殷邦，方興沈酗于酒。乃罔畏畏，咈其耇長、舊有位人。今殷民，乃攘竊神只之犧牷牲，用以容，將食無災。降監殷民，用乂；讎斂，召敵讎不怠。罪合于一，多瘠罔詔。商今其有災，我興受其敗。商其淪喪，我罔為臣仆。詔王子出迪，我舊云刻子；王子弗出，我乃顛隮。自靖，人自獻于先王，我不顧行遯。」

The Grand-Master made about the following reply: 'O son of our (former) king, Heaven in anger is sending down calamities, and wasting the country of Yin. Hence has arisen that mad indulgence in spirits. (The king) has no reverence for things which he ought to reverenced but does despite to the venerable aged, the men who have long been in office. The people of Yin will now steal even the pure and perfect victims devoted to the spirits of heaven and earth; and their conduct is connived at, and though they proceed to eat the victims, they suffer no punishment. (On the other hand), when I look down and survey the people of Yin, the methods by which they are governed are hateful exactions, which call forth outrages and hatred; and this without ceasing. Such crimes equally belong to all in authority, and multitudes are starving with none to whom to appeal. Now is the time of Shang's calamity; I will arise and share in its ruin. When ruin overtakes Shang, I will not be the servant (of another House). (But) I tell you, O king's son, to go away, as being the, course (for you). Formerly I injured you by what I said; if you do not (now) go away, our (sacrifices) will entirely perish. Let us rest quietly (in our several parts), and each present himself to the former kings (as having done so). I do not think of making my escape.'


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge