昔在帝堯，聰明文思，光宅天下，將遜于位，讓于虞舜，作《堯典》。
曰若稽古帝堯，曰放勳，欽、明、文、思、安安，允恭克讓，光被四表，

[p. 15] Examining into antiquity, we find that the emperor Yaou was called Fang-heun. He was reverential, inteUigent, accomplished, and thoughtful, — naturally and without-effprt. He was sincerely cour- te-Qus, and_ capable of all complaisance. The. display of these quali- ties rea,ched totlie four extremities of the empire^ and extended from

格于上下。克明俊德，以親九族。九族既睦，平章百姓。百姓昭明，協和萬邦。黎民於變時雍。
[p. 17] earth to heaven. He was able to make the able and virtuous distinguished, and thence proceeded to the love of the nine classes of his kindred, who all became harmonious. He also regulated and polished the people of his domain who all became brightly intelligent. Finally, he united and harmonized the myriad States of the empire; and lo ! the black-liaired people were transformed. The result was universal concord.

乃命羲和，欽若昊天，曆象日月星辰，敬授人時。分命羲仲，宅嵎夷，曰暘谷。
[p. 18] Thereupon Yaou commanded He and Ho, in reverent accordance with their observation of the wide heavens, to calculate and delineate the movements and appearances of the sun, the moon, the stars, and the zodiacal spaces; and so to deliver respectfully the seasons to the people.
He separately commanded the second brother He to reside at Yu-e, in what was called the Bright Valley, and there respectfully to

寅賓出日，平秩東作。日中，星鳥，以殷仲春。厥民析，鳥獸孳尾。申命羲叔，宅南交。平秩南訛，敬致。
[p. 19] receive as a guest the rising sun, and to adjust and arrange the labours of the spring. 'The day,' (said he), 'is of the medium length, and the star is in Niao - you may thus exactly determine mid-spring. The people are dispersed (in the fields), and birds and beasts breed and copulate.'
He further commanded the third brother Xi to reside at Nan-jiao, (in what was called the Brilliant Capital). to adjust and arrange the transformations of the summer, and respectfully-to observe the exact limit (of the shadow). 'The day,' (said he), 

日永，星火，以正仲夏。厥民因，鳥獸希革。分命和仲，宅西，曰昧谷。寅餞納日，平秩西成。宵中，星虛，以殷仲秋。厥民夷，鳥獸毛毨。
[p. 20] 'is at its longest, and the star is in Huo - you may thus exactly determine mid-summer. The people are more dispersed; and birds and beasts have their feathers and hair thin, and change their coats.'
He separately commanded the second brother He to reside at the west, in what was called the Dark Valley, and (there) respectfully to convoy the setting sun, and to adjust and arrange the completing labours of the autumn. 'The night' (said he), 'is of the medium length, and the star is in Xu - you may thus exactly determine mid-autumn. The people feel at ease, and birds and beasts have their coats in good condition.'

申命和叔，宅朔方，曰幽都。平在朔易。日短，星昴，以正仲冬。厥民隩，鳥獸氄毛。帝曰：「咨！汝羲暨和。朞三百有六旬有六日，以閏月定四時，成歲。允釐百工，庶績咸熙。」
[p. 21] He further commanded the third brother He to reside in the northern region, in what was called the Sombre Capital, and (there) to adjust and examine the changes of the winter. 'The day,' (said he), 'is at its shortest, and the star is in Mao - you may thus exactly determine mid-winter. The people, keep in their houses, and the coats of birds and beasts are downy and thick.'
The Di said, 'Ah! you, Xis and Hes, a round year consists of three hundred, sixty, and six days. Do you, by means of the intercalary 
[p. 22] month, fix the four seasons, and complete (the period of) the year. (Thereafter), the various officers being regulated, in accordance with this, all the works (of the year) will be fully performed.'

帝曰：「疇咨若時登庸？」放齊曰：「胤子朱啟明。」帝曰：「吁！嚚訟可乎？」
[p. 23] The emperor said, " Who will search out for me a man according to the times, whom I may raise and employ? " Fang-ts'e said, " There is your heir-son Choo, who is highly intelligent." The emperor said, "Alas! he is insincere and quarrelsome:— can he do."

帝曰：「疇咨若予采？」驩兜曰：「都！共
The emperor said, " Who will search out for me a man equal to the exigency of my affairs?" Hwan-tow said, "Oh! there is the minister of Works, whose merits have just been displayed in various

工方鳩僝功。」帝曰：「吁！靜言庸違，象恭滔天。」
[p. 24] ways." The emperor said, "Alas I when unemployed, he can talk; but when employed, his actions turn out differently. He is respectful only in appearance. See I the floods assail the heavens."

帝曰：「咨！四岳，湯湯洪水方割，蕩蕩懷山襄陵，浩浩滔天。
The emperor said, "Oh! Chief of the four mountains, destructive in their overflow are the waters of the inundation. In their vast extent they embrace the mountains and overtop the hills, threatening the heavens with their floods, 

下民其咨，有能俾乂？」僉曰：「於！鯀
so that the inferior people groan and murmur. Is there a capable man, to whom 1 can assign the correction of this calamity ? All in the court said, "Oh! there is

哉。」帝曰：「吁！咈哉，方命圮族。」岳曰：「异哉！試可乃已。」
[p. 25] Kwan. The emperor said, " Alas! no, by no means ! He is disobedient to orders, and tries to injure his peers." His Eminence said," Well but -. Try him, and then you can have done with him."

帝曰，「往，欽哉！」九載，績用弗成。
The emperor said to Kwan, "Go; and be reverent." For nine years he laboured, but the work was unaccomplished.

帝曰：「咨！四岳。朕在位七十載，汝能庸命，巽朕位？」岳曰：
The emperor said, 'Oh! you chief of the four mountains, I have been on the throne for seventy years. You can carry out my appointments; — I will resign mv throne to you." His Eminence said," 

「否德忝帝位。」
I have not the virtue; I should only disgrace the imperial seat.

曰：「明明揚側陋。」師錫帝曰：「有鰥在下，曰虞舜。」帝曰：「俞？予聞，如何？」岳曰：「瞽子，父頑，母嚚，象傲；克諧以孝，烝烝乂，不格姦。」帝曰：「我其試哉！女于時，觀厥刑于二女。」釐降二女于媯汭，嬪于虞。帝曰：「欽哉！」
[p. 26] The emperor said, "Point out some one among the illustrious, or set forth one from among the poor and mean." All in the court said to the emperor, "There is an unmarried man among the lower people, called Shun of Yu." The emperor said, " Yes, I have heard of him. What is his character?" His Eminence said, "He is the son of a blind man. His father was obstinately unprincipled; his step-mother was insincere; his half brother Seang was arrogant. He has been able, howvever, by his filial piety to live in harmony with them, and to lead them gradually to self-government, so that they no longer proceed to great wickedness." The emperor said, " I will try him!
[p. 27] I will wive him, and then see his behaviour with my two daughters." On this he gave orders, and sent down his two daughters to the north of the Kwei, to be wives in the family of Yu. The emperor said to them^ "Be reverent! "

本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge