王出在應門之內。太保率西方諸侯，入應門左；畢公率東方諸侯，入應門右。皆布乘黃朱。賓稱奉圭兼弊，曰：「一二臣衛，敢執壤奠。」皆再拜稽首。王義嗣德，答拜。

The king came forth and stood (in the space) within the fourth gate of the palace, when the Grand-Guardian led in the princes of the western regions by the left (half) of the gate, and the duke of Bi those of the eastern regions by the right (half). They then all caused their teams of light bay horses, with their manes and tails dyed red, to be exhibited; and, (as the king's) guests, lifted up their rank-symbols, and (the other) presents (they had brought), saying, 'We your servants, defenders (of the throne), venture to bring the productions of our territories, and lay them here.' (With these words) they all did obeisance twice, laying their heads on the ground. The king, as the righteous successor to the virtue of those who had gone before him, returned their obeisance.

太保暨芮伯，咸進，相揖，皆再拜稽首。曰：「敢敬告天子，皇天改大邦殷之命，惟周文武，誕受羑若，克恤西土。惟新陟王，畢協賞罰，戡定厥功，用敷遺後人休。今王敬之哉！張皇六師，無壞我高祖寡命。」

The Grand-Guardian and the earl of Rui, with all the rest, then advanced and bowed to each other, after which they did obeisance twice, with their heads to the ground, and said, 'O Son of Heaven, we venture respectfully to declare our sentiments. Great Heaven altered its decree which the great House of Yin had received, and Wen and Wu of our Zhou grandly received the same, and carried it out, manifesting their kindly government in the western regions. His recently ascended majesty, rewarding and punishing exactly in accordance with what was right, fully established their achievements, and transmitted this happy state to his successors. Do you, O king, now be reverent. Maintain your armies in great order, and do not allow the rarely equalled appointment of our high ancestors to come to harm.'

王若曰：「庶邦侯、甸、男、衛！惟予一人釗報誥：昔君文武，丕平富，不務咎，厎至齊，信用昭明于天下。則亦有熊羆之士、不二心之臣，保乂王家，用端命于上帝；皇天用訓厥道，付畀四方。乃命建侯樹屏，在我後之人。今予一二伯父，尚胥暨顧，綏爾先公之臣服于先王。雖爾身在外，乃心罔不在王室。用奉恤厥若，無遺鞠子羞。」

The king spoke to the following effect: 'Ye princes of the various states, chiefs of the Hou, Dian, Nan, and Wei domains, I, Zhao, the One man, make an announcement in return (for your advice). The former rulers, Wen and Wu, were greatly just and enriched (the people). They did not occupy themselves to find out people's crimes. Pushing to the utmost and maintaining an entire impartiality and sincerity, they became gloriously illustrious all under heaven. Then they had officers brave as bears and grisly bears, and ministers of no double heart, who (helped them) to maintain and regulate the royal House. Thus (did they receive) the true favouring decree from God, and thus did great Heaven approve of their ways, and give them the four quarters (of the land). Then they appointed and set up principalities, and established bulwarks (to the throne), for the sake of us, their successors. Now do ye, my uncles, I pray you, consider with one another, and carry out the service which the dukes, your predecessors, rendered to my predecessors. Though your persons be distant, let your hearts be in the royal House. Enter thus into my anxieties, and act in accordance with them, so that I, the little child, may not be put to shame.'

群公既皆聽命，相揖趨出。王釋冕，反喪服。

The dukes and all the others, having heard this charge, bowed to one another, and hastily withdrew. The king put off his cap, and assumed again his mourning dress.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge