成王將崩，命召公、畢公率諸侯相康王，作《顧命》。

惟四月，哉生魄，王不懌。甲子，王乃洮頮水，相被冕服，憑玉几。乃同召太保奭、芮伯、彤伯、畢公、衛侯、毛公、師氏、虎臣、百尹、御事。

In the fourth month, when the moon began to wane, the king was indisposed. On the day Jia-zi, he washed his hands and face; his attendants put on him his cap and robes; (and he sat up), leaning on a gem-adorned bench. He then called together the Grand-Guardian Shi, the earls of Rui and Tong, the duke of Bi, the marquis of Wei, the duke of Mao, the master of the warders, the master of the guards, the heads of the various departments, and the superintendents of affairs.

王曰：「嗚呼！疾大漸，惟幾；病日臻，既彌留，恐不獲誓言嗣，茲予審訓命汝。昔君文王、武王，宣重光，尊麗陳教則肄；肄不違，用克達殷集大命。在後之侗，敬迓天威，嗣守文武大訓，無敢昏逾。今天降疾、殆，弗興弗悟；爾尚明時朕言，用敬保元子釗，弘濟于艱難。柔遠能邇，安勸小大庶邦。思夫人自亂于威儀，爾無以釗冒貢于非幾。」

The king said, 'Oh! my illness has greatly increased, and it will soon be over with me. The malady comes on daily with more violence, and maintains its hold. I am afraid I may not find (another opportunity) to declare my wishes about my successor, and therefore I (now) lay my charge upon you with special instructions. The former rulers, our kings Wen and Wu, displayed in succession their equal glory, making sure provision for the support of the people, and setting forth their instructions. (The people) accorded a practical submission, without any opposition, and the influence (of their example and instructions) extended to Yin, and the great appointment (of Heaven) was secured. After them, I, the stupid one, received with reverence the dread (decree) of Heaven, and continued to keep the great instructions of Wen and Wu, not daring blindly to transgress them. Now Heaven has laid affliction on me, and it seems as if I should not again rise or be myself. Do you take clear note of these my words, and in accordance with them watch reverently over my eldest son Zhao, and greatly assist him in the difficulties of his position. Be kind to those who are far off, and help those who are near. Promote the tranquillity of the states, small and great, and encourage them (to well-doing). I think how a man has to govern himself in dignity and with decorum; do not you allow Zhao to proceed heedlessly on the impulse of improper motives.'

茲既受命還，出綴衣于庭。越翼日乙丑，王崩。

Immediately on receiving this charge, (the ministers and others) withdrew. The tent was then carried out into the court; and on the next day, (being) Yi-chou, the king died.

太保命仲桓、南宮毛，俾爰齊侯呂汲，以二干戈、虎賁百人，逆子釗於南門之外；延入翼室，恤宅宗。丁卯，命作冊度。越七日癸酉，伯相命士須材。

The Grand-Guardian then ordered Zhong Huan and Nan-Gong Mao to instruct Lu Ji, the marquis of Qi, with two shield-and-spearmen, and a hundred guards, to meet the prince Zhao outside the south gate, and conduct him to (one of) the side-apartments (near to that where the king lay), there to be as chief mourner. On the day Ding-Mao, (two days after the king's death), he ordered (the charge) to be recorded on tablets, and the forms (to be observed in publishing it). Seven days after, on Gui-you, as chief (of the west) and premier, he ordered the (proper) officers to prepare the wood (for all the requirements of the funeral).

狄設黼扆、綴衣。牖間南向，敷重篾席、黼純；華玉仍几。西序東向，敷重厎席、綴純，文貝仍几。東序西向，敷重豐席、畫純，雕玉仍几。西夾南向，敷重筍席、玄紛純，漆仍几。越玉五重：陳寶、赤刀，大訓、弘璧，琬、琰，在西序；大玉、夷玉、天球、河圖，在東序。胤之舞衣，大貝、鼖鼓，在西房；兌之戈、和之弓、垂之竹矢，在東房。大輅在賓階面，綴輅在阼階面，先輅在左塾之前，次輅在右塾之前。

The salvage men set out the screens, ornamented with figures of axes, and the tents. Between the window (and the door), facing the south, they placed the (three)fold mat of fine bamboo splints, with its striped border of white and black silk, and the usual bench adorned with different-coloured gems. In the side-space on the west, which faced the east, they placed the threefold rush mat, with its variegated border, and the usual bench adorned with beautiful shells. In the side-space on the east, which faced the west, they placed the threefold mat of fine grass, with its border of painted silk, and the usual bench carved, and adorned with gems. Before the western side-chamber, and facing the south, they placed the threefold mat of fine bamboo, with its dark mixed border, and the usual lacquered bench. (They set forth) also the five pairs of gems (or jade), and the precious things of display. There were the red knife, the great lessons, the large round-and-convex symbol of jade, and the rounded and pointed maces, all in the side-space on the west; the large piece of jade, the pieces contributed by the wild tribes of the east, the heavenly sounding-stone, and the river-plan, all in the side-space on the east; the dancing habits of Yin, the large . large tortoise-shell, and the large drum, all in the western apartment; the spear of Dui, the bow of He, and the bamboo arrows of Chui, all in the eastern apartment. The grand carriage was by the guests' steps, facing (the south); the next was by the eastern (or host' s) steps, facing (the south). The front carriage was placed before the left lobby, and the one that followed it before the right lobby.

二人雀弁執惠，立于畢門之內；四人綦弁，執戈、上刃，夾兩階戺；一人冕執劉，立于東堂；一人冕執鉞，立于西堂；一人冕執戣，立于東垂；一人冕執瞿，立于西垂；一人冕執銳，立于側階。

Two men in brownish leather caps, and holding three-cornered halberts, stood inside the gate leading to the private apartments. Four men in caps of spotted deer-skin, holding spears with blades upturned from the base of the point, stood, one on each side of the steps east and west, and near to the platform of the hall. One man in a great officer's cap, and holding an axe, stood in the hall, (near the steps) at the east (end). One man in a great officer's cap, and holding an axe of a different pattern, stood in the hall, (near the steps) at the west end. One man in a great officer's cap, and holding a lance, stood at the front and east of the hall, close by the steps. One man in a great officer's cap, and holding a lance of a different pattern, stood in the corresponding place on the west. One man in a great officer's cap, and holding a pointed weapon, stood by the steps on the north side of the hall.

王麻冕黼裳，由賓階隮。卿士邦君，麻冕蟻裳，入即位。太保、太史、太宗，皆麻冕彤裳。太保承介圭，上宗奉同、瑁，由阼階隮。太史秉書，由賓階隮，御王冊命。曰：「皇后憑玉几，道揚末命，命汝嗣訓，臨君周邦，率循大卞，燮和天下，用答揚文武之光訓。」王再拜，興。答曰：「眇眇予末小子，其能而亂四方，以敬忌天威？」乃受同、瑁，王三宿，三祭，三叱。上宗曰：「饗。」太保受同，降。盥，以異同，秉璋以酢。授宗人同；拜，王答拜。太保受同，祭、嚌、宅。授宗人同；拜，王答拜。太保降，收。諸侯出廟門俟。

The king, in a linen cap and the variously figured, skirt, ascended by the guests' steps, followed by the high ministers, (great) officers, and princes of states, in linen caps and dark-coloured skirts. Arrived in the hall, they all took their (proper) places. The Grand-Guardian, the Grand-Historiographer, and the Minister of Religion were all in linen caps and red skirts. The Grand-Guardian bore the great mace. The Minister of Religion bore the cup and the mace-cover. These two ascended by the steps on the east. The Grand Historiographer bore, the testamentary charge. He ascended by the guests' steps (on the west), and advanced to the king with the tablets containing the charge, and said, 'Our royal sovereign, leaning on the gem-adorned bench, declared his last charge, and commanded you to continue (the observance of) the lessons, and to take the rule of the kingdom of Zhou, complying with the great laws, and securing the harmony of all under the sky, so as to respond to and display the bright instructions of Wen and Wu.'
The king twice bowed (low), and then arose, and replied, 'I am utterly insignificant and but a child, how should I be able to govern the four quarters (of the kingdom) with a corresponding reverent awe of the dread majesty of Heaven!' He then received the cup and the mace-cover. Thrice he slowly and reverently advanced with a cup of spirits (to the east of the coffin); thrice he sacrificed (to the spirit of his father); and thrice he put the cup down. The Minister of Religion said, 'It is accepted.'
The Grand-Guardian received the cup, descended the steps, and washed his hands. He then took another cup, (placed it on) a half-mace which he carried, and repeated the sacrifice. He then gave the cup to one of the attendants of the Minister of Religion, and did obeisance. The king returned the obeisance. The Grand-Guardian took a cup again, and poured out the spirits in sacrifice. He then just tasted the spirits, returned to his place, gave the cup to the attendant, and did obeisance. The king returned the obeisance. The Grand Guardian descended from the hall, after which the various (sacrificial) articles were removed, and the princes all went out at the temple gate and waited.


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge