盤庚遷于殷，民不適有居。率吁眾戚出矢言。曰：「我王來，既爰宅于茲；重我民，無盡劉。不能胥匡以生；卜稽曰其如臺？先王有服，恪謹天命；茲猶不常寧，不常厥邑，于今五邦。今不承于古，罔知天之斷命，矧曰其克從先王之烈？若顛木之有由蘗，天其永我命于茲新邑，紹復先王之大業，厎綏四方。」

Pan-geng wished to remove (the capital) to Yin, but the people would not go to dwell there. He therefore appealed to all the discontented, and made the following protestations. 'Our king came, and fixed on this. He did so from a deep concern for our people, and not because he would have them all die, where they cannot (now) help one another to preserve their lives. I have consulted the tortoise-shell, and obtained the reply: "This is no place for us." When the former kings had any (important) business, they gave reverent heed to the commands of Heaven. In a case like this especially they did not indulge (the wish for) constant repose - they did not abide ever in the same city. Up to this time (the capital has been) in five regions. If we do not follow (the example) of these old times, we shall be refusing to acknowledge that Heaven is making an end of our dynasty (here); how little can it be said of us that we are following the meritorious course of the former kings! As from the stump of a felled tree there are sprouts and shoots, Heaven will perpetuate its decree in our favour in this new city;--the great inheritance of the former kings will be continued and renewed, and tranquillity will be secured to the four quarters (of the kingdom).'

盤庚教于民，由乃在位，以常舊服，正法度。曰：「無或敢伏小人之攸箴！」王命眾，悉至于庭。

Pan-geng, in making the people aware of his views, began with those who were in (high) places, and took the constantly-recurring circumstances of former times to lay down the right law and measure (for the present emergency), saying, 'Let none of you dare to suppress the remonstrances of the poor people.' The king commanded all to come to him in the courtyard (of his palace).

王若曰：「格汝眾。予告汝訓：汝猷黜乃心，無傲從康。古我先王，亦惟圖任舊人共政。王播告之，修不匿厥指，王用丕欽；罔有逸言，民用丕變。今汝聒聒，起信險膚，予弗知乃所訟。

「非予自荒茲德，惟汝含德，不惕予一人。予若觀火。予亦拙謀，作乃逸。

The king spoke to this effect: 'Come, all of you; I will announce to you my instructions. Take counsel how to put away your (selfish) thoughts. Do not with haughty (disregard of me) follow after your own ease. Of old, our former kings planned like me how to employ the men of old families to share in (the labours of) government. When they wished to proclaim and announce what was to be attended to, these did not conceal the royal views; and on this account the kings greatly respected them. They did not exceed the truth (in their communications with the people), and on this account the people became greatly changed (in their views). Now, (however), you keep clamouring, and get the confidence (of the people) by alarming and shallow speeches; I do not know what you are wrangling about. (In this movement) I am not myself abandoning my proper virtue, but you conceal the goodness of my intentions, and do not stand in awe of me, the One man. I see you as clearly as one sees a fire; but I, likewise, by my undecided plans, have produced your error.

若網在綱，有條而不紊；若農服田力穡，乃亦有秋。汝克黜乃心，施實德于民，至于婚友；丕乃敢大言，汝有積德。乃不畏戎毒于遠邇；惰農自安，不昏作勞，不服田畝，越其罔有黍稷。

'When the net has its line, there is order and not confusion; and when the husbandman labours upon his fields, and reaps with all his might, there is the (abundant) harvest. If you can put away your (selfish) thoughts, and bestow real good upon the people, reaching (also) to your own relatives and friends, you may boldly venture to make your words great, and say that you have accumulated merit. But you do not fear the great evils which (through our not removing) are extending far and near; (you are like) idle husbandmen, who yield themselves to ease, and are not strong to toil and labour on their acres, so that they cannot get their crop of millets.

汝不和吉言于百姓，惟汝自生毒；乃敗禍奸宄，以自災于厥身。乃既先惡于民，乃奉其恫，汝悔身何及！相時憸民，猶胥顧于箴言；其發有逸口，矧予制乃短長之命？汝曷弗告朕，而胥動以浮言，恐沈于眾？若火之燎于原，不可向邇，其猶可撲滅。則惟汝眾自作弗靖，非予有咎。

'You do not speak in a spirit of harmony and goodness to the people, and are only giving birth to bitter evils for yourselves. You play the part of destroyers and authors of calamity, of villains and traitors, to bring down misery on your own persons. You set the example of evil, and must feel its smart; what will it avail you (then) to repent? Look at the poor people - they are still able to look to one another and give expression to their remonstrances, but when they begin to speak, you are ready with your extravagant talk; how much more ought you to have me before your eyes, with whom it is to make your lives long or short! Why do you not report (their words) to me, but go about to excite one another by empty speeches, frightening and involving the multitudes in misery? When a fire is blazing in the flames so that it cannot be approached, can it still be beaten out? So, it will not be I who will be to blame, that you all cause dispeace in this way, (and must suffer the consequences).

「遲任有言曰：『人惟求舊；器非求舊，惟新。』古我先王，暨乃祖乃父，胥及逸勤；予敢動用非罰？世選爾勞，予不掩爾善。茲予大享于先王，爾祖其從與享之。作福作災，予亦不敢動用非德。

'Chi Ren has said, "In men we seek those of old families; in vessels, we do not seek old ones, but new." Of old, the kings, my predecessors, and your forefathers and fathers shared together the ease and labours (of the government); how should I dare to lay undeserved afflictions on you? For generations the toils of your (fathers) have been approved, and I will not conceal your goodness. Now when I offer the great sacrifices to my predecessors, your forefathers are present to share in them. (They all observe) the happiness I confer and the sufferings I inflict, and I cannot dare to reward virtue that does not exist.

予告汝于難；若射之有志。汝無侮老成人，無弱孤有幼。各長于厥居，勉出乃力，聽予一人之作猷。無有遠邇，用罪伐厥死，用德彰厥善。邦之臧，惟汝眾；邦之不臧，惟予一人有佚罰。凡爾眾，其惟致告：自今至于後日，各恭爾事，齊乃位，度乃口。罰及爾身，弗可悔。」

'I have announced to you the difficulties (of the intended movement), being bent on it, like an archer (whose only thought is to hit). Do not you despise the old and experienced, and do not make little of the helpless and young. Seek every one long continuance in this (new city), which is to be your abode; exert yourselves and put out your strength (in furthering the removal), and listen to the plans of me, the One man. I will make no distinction between men as being more distantly or more nearly related to me;--the criminal (in this matter) shall die the death, and the good-doer shall have his virtue distinguished. The prosperity of the country (ought to) come from you all. If it fail of prosperity, that must arise from me, the One man, erring in the application of punishment. Be sure, all of you, to make known this announcement. From this time forward, attend respectfully to your business; have (the duties of) your offices regularly adjusted; bring your tongues under the rule of law:--lest punishment come upon you, when repentance will be of no avail.'


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge