盤庚既遷，奠厥攸居。乃正厥位，綏爰有眾。曰：「無戲怠，懋建大命。今予其敷心腹腎腸，歷告爾百姓于朕志。罔罪爾眾；爾無共怒，協比讒言予一人。

Pan-geng having completed the removal, and settled the places of residence, proceeded to adjust the several positions (of all classes at an assembly); and then he soothed and comforted the multitudes, saying to them, 'Do not play nor be idle, but exert yourselves to build (here) a great destiny (for us). Now I have disclosed my heart and belly, my reins and bowels, and fully declared to you, my people, all my mind. I will not treat any of you as offenders; and do not you (any more) help one another to be angry, and form parties to defame me, the One man.

古我先王，將多于前功，適于山。用降我兇，德嘉績于朕邦。今我民用蕩析離居，罔有定極。爾謂朕：『曷震動萬民以遷？』肆上帝將復我高祖之德，亂越我家。朕及篤敬，恭承民命，用永地于新邑。肆予沖人，非廢厥謀，吊由靈。各非敢違卜，用宏茲賁。

'Of old, my royal predecessor, (Tang), that his merit might exceed that of those who were before him, proceeded to the hill-site. Thereby he removed our evils, and accomplished admirable good for our country. Now you, my people, were by (your position) dissipated and separated, so that you had no abiding place. (And yet) you asked why I was troubling your myriads and requiring you to remove. But God, being about to renew the virtuous service of my high ancestor, and secure the good order of our kingdom, I, with the sincere and respectful (of my ministers), felt a reverent care for the lives of the people, and have made a lasting settlement in (this) new city. I, a youth, did not neglect your counsels; I (only) used the best of them. Nor did any of you presumptuously oppose the decision of the tortoise-shell;--so we are here to enlarge our great inheritance.'

嗚呼！邦伯、師長、百執事之人，尚皆隱哉。予其懋簡相爾，念敬我眾。朕不肩好貨；敢恭生生，鞠人、謀人之保居，敘欽。今我既羞告爾于朕志，若否，罔有弗欽。無總于貨寶，生生自庸。式敷民德，永肩一心。」

'Oh! ye chiefs of regions, ye heads of departments, all ye, the hundreds of officers, would that ye had a sympathy,(with my people)! I will exert myself in the choice and guiding of you; do ye think reverently of my multitudes. I will not employ those who are-fond of, enriching themselves; but will use and revere those who are vigorously, yet reverently, labouring for the lives and increase of the people, nourishing them and planning for their enduring settlement. I have now brought forward and announced to you my mind, whom I approve and whom I disallow; let none of you but reverence (my will). Do not seek to accumulate wealth and precious things, but in fostering the life of the people, seek to find your merit. Reverently display your virtue in behalf of the people. For ever maintain this one purpose in your hearts.'


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge