惟說命總百官，乃進於王，曰：「嗚呼！明王奉若天道，建邦設都，樹後王君公，承以大夫師長。不惟逸豫，惟以亂民。惟天聰明，惟聖時憲，惟臣欽若，惟民從乂；惟口起羞，惟甲胄起戎；惟衣裳在笥，惟干戈省厥躬。王惟戒茲，允茲克明，乃罔不休。

「惟治亂在庶官；官不及私昵，惟其能。爵罔及惡德，惟其賢。慮善以動，動惟厥時。有其善，喪厥善；矜其能，喪厥功。惟事事乃其有備，有備無患。無啟寵納侮，無恥過作非。惟厥攸居，政事惟醇。黷于祭祀，時謂弗欽；禮煩則亂，事神則難。」

Yue having received his charge, and taken the presidency of all the officers, he presented himself before the king, and said, 'Oh! intelligent kings act in reverent accordance with the ways of Heaven. The founding of states and the setting up of capitals, the appointing of sovereign kings, of dukes and other nobles, with their great officers and heads of departments, were not designed to minister to the idleness and pleasures (of one), but for the good government of the people. It is Heaven which is all-intelligent and observing - let the sage (king) take it as his pattern. Then his ministers will reverently accord with him, and the people consequently will be well governed.
'It is the mouth that gives occasion for shame; they are the coat of mail and helmet that give occasion to war. The upper robes and lower garments (for reward should not be lightly taken from) their chests; before spear and shield are used, one should examine himself. If your Majesty will be cautious in regard to these things, and, believing this about them, attain to the intelligent use of them, (your government) will in everything be excellent. Good government and bad depend on the various officers. Offices should not be given to men because they are favourites, but only to men of ability. Dignities should not be conferred on men of evil practices, but only on men of worth.
'Anxious thought about what will be best should precede your movements, which also should be taken at the time proper for them. Indulging the consciousness of being good is the way to lose that goodness; being vain of one's ability is the way to lose the merit it might produce.
'For all affairs let there be adequate preparation; with preparation there will be no calamitous issue. Do not open the door for favourites, from whom you will receive contempt. Do not be ashamed of mistakes, and (go on to) make them crimes. Let your mind rest in its proper objects, and the affairs of your government will be pure. Officiousness in sacrificing is called irreverence; and multiplying ceremonies leads to disorder. To serve the spirits acceptably (in this way) is difficult.'

王曰：「旨哉！說乃言惟服。乃不良于言，予罔聞于行。」說拜稽首，曰：「非知之艱，行之惟艱。王忱不艱，允協于先王成德。惟說不言，有厥咎。」

The king said, 'Excellent! your words, O Yue, should indeed be put in practice (by me). If you were not so good in counsel, I should not have heard these rules for my conduct." Yue did obeisance with his head to the ground, and said, 'It is not the knowing that is difficult, but the doing. (But) since your Majesty truly knows this, there will not be the difficulty, and you will become really equal in complete virtue to our first king. Wherein I, Yue, refrain from speaking (what I ought to speak), the blame will rest with me.'


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge