公曰：「嗟！人無譁，聽命！徂茲淮夷、徐戎并興，善敹乃甲胄，敿乃干，無敢不吊。備乃弓矢，鍛乃戈矛，礪乃鋒刃，無敢不善。今惟淫舍牿牛馬，杜乃擭，穽乃阱，無敢傷牿。牿之傷，汝則有常刑。馬牛其風，臣妾逋逃，無敢越逐；只復之，我商賚汝。乃越逐不復，汝則有常刑。無敢寇攘：逾垣墻，竊馬牛，誘臣妾，汝則有常刑。

The duke said, 'Ah! ye men, make no noise, but listen to my commands. We are going (to punish) those wild tribes of the Huai and of Xu, which have risen up together. Have in good repair your buff coats and helmets; have the laces of your shields well secured;--presume not to have any of them but in perfect order. Prepare your bows and arrows; temper your lances and spears; sharpen your pointed and edged weapons;--presume not to have any of them but in good condition. We must now largely let the oxen and horses loose, and not keep them in enclosures;--(ye people), do you close your traps and fill up your pitfalls, and do not presume to injure any of the animals (so let loose). If any of them be injured, you shall be dealt with according to the regular punishments. When the horses or cattle are seeking one another, or when your followers, male or female, abscond, presume not to leave the ranks to pursue them. But let them be carefully returned. I will reward you (among the people) who return them according to their value. But if you leave your places to pursue them, or if you who find them do not restore them, you shall be dealt with according to the regular punishments. And let none of you presume to commit any robbery or detain any creature that comes in your way, to jump over enclosures and walls to steal (people's) horses or oxen, or to decoy away their servants or female attendants. If you do so, you shall be dealt with according to the regular punishments.

甲戌，我惟征徐戎。峙乃糗糧，無敢不逮；汝則有大刑。魯人三郊三遂，峙乃楨干；甲戌，我惟筑。無敢不供；汝則有無餘刑，非殺。魯人三郊三遂，峙乃芻茭，無敢不多；汝則有大刑。」

'On the day Jia-Xu I will take action against the hordes of Xu; prepare the roasted grain and other provisions, and presume not to have any deficiency. If you have, you shall suffer the severest punishment. Ye men of Lu, from the three environing territories and the three tracts beyond, be ready with your posts and planks. On Jia-Xu I will commence my intrenchments - dare not but be provided with a supply of these. (If you be not so provided), you shall be subjected to various punishments, short only of death. Ye men of Lu, from the three environing territories and the three tracts beyond, be ready with the forage, and do not dare to let it be other than abundant. (If you do), you shall suffer the severest punishment.'


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge