惟戊午，王次于河朔。群後以師畢會。王乃徇師而誓，曰：「嗚呼！西土有眾，咸聽朕言。

On (the day) Wu-wu, the king halted on the north of the He. When all the princes with their hosts were assembled, the king reviewed the hosts, and made the following declaration: 'Oh! ye multitudes of the west, hearken all to my words.

我聞：吉人為善，惟日不足；兇人為不善，亦惟日不足。今商王受，力行無度，播棄犁老，昵比罪人。淫酗肆虐，臣下化之。朋家作仇，脅權相滅，無辜吁天，穢德彰聞。

'I have heard that the good man, doing good, finds the day insufficient; and that the evil man, doing evil, also finds the day insufficient. Now Shou, the king of Shang, with strength pursues his lawless way. He has driven away the timeworn sires, and cultivates intimacies with wicked men. Dissolute, intemperate, reckless, oppressive, his ministers have become assimilated to him; and they form combinations and contract animosities, and depend on their power to exterminate one another. The innocent cry to Heaven. The odour of such a state is felt on high.

惟天惠民，惟辟奉天。有夏桀，弗克若天，流毒下國，天乃佑命成湯，降黜夏命。惟受罪浮于桀，剝喪元良，賊虐諫輔，謂己有天命，謂敬不足行，謂祭無益，謂暴無傷，厥監惟不遠，在彼夏王。

「天其以予乂民，朕夢協朕卜，襲于休祥，戎商必克，

'Heaven loves the people, and the sovereign should reverently carry out (this mind of) Heaven. Jie, the sovereign of Xia, would not follow the example of Heaven, but sent forth his poisonous injuries through the states of the kingdom. Heaven therefore gave its aid to Tang the Successful, and charged him to make an end of the appointment of Xia. But the crimes of Shou exceed those of Jie. He has degraded from office the greatly good man; he has behaved with cruel tyranny to his reprover and helper. He says that with him is the appointment of Heaven; he says that a reverent care of his conduct is not worth observing; he says that sacrifice is of no use; he says that tyranny is no harm. The beacon for him to look to was not far off - it was that king of Xia. It would seem that Heaven is going by means of me to rule the people. My dreams coincide with my divinations; the auspicious omen is double. My attack on Shang must succeed.

受有億兆夷人，離心離德，予有亂臣十人，同心同德。雖有周親，不如仁人。天視自我民視，天聽自我民聽。百姓有過，在予一人。今朕必往，我武惟揚，侵于之疆，取彼兇殘，我伐用張，于湯有光。勖哉夫子，罔或無畏，寧執非敵。百姓檁檁，若崩厥角。嗚呼！乃一德一心，立定厥功，惟克永世。」

'Shou has hundreds of thousands and millions of ordinary men, divided in heart and, divided in practice; I have of ministers, able to govern, ten men, one in heart and one in practice. Though he has his nearest relatives with him, they are not like my virtuous men. Heaven sees as my people see; Heaven hears as my people hear. The people are blaming me, the One man, for my delay; I must now go forward. My military prowess is displayed, and I enter his territories to take the wicked tyrant. My punishment (of evil) will be great, and more glorious than that executed by Tang. Rouse ye, my heroes! Do not think that he is not to be feared; better think that he cannot be withstood. (His) people stand in trembling awe of him, as if the horns were falling from their heads. Oh! unite your energies, unite your hearts; so shall you forthwith surely accomplish the work, to last for all ages!'


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge