曰若稽古。皋陶曰：「允迪厥德，謨明弼諧。」

Examining into antiquity, (we find that) Gao-Yao said, 'If (the sovereign) sincerely pursues the course of his virtue, the counsels (offered to him) will be intelligent, and the aids (of admonition that he receives) will be harmonious.'

禹曰：「俞！如何？」

Yu said, 'Yes, but explain yourself.'

皋陶曰：「都！慎厥身，修思永。惇敘九族，庶明勵翼，邇可遠，在茲。」

Gao-Yao said, 'Oh! let him be careful about his personal cultivation, with thoughts that are far-reaching, and thus he will produce a generous kindness and nice observance of distinctions among the nine branches of his kindred. All the intelligent (also) will exert themselves in his service; and in this way from what is near he will reach to what is distant.'

禹拜昌言曰：「俞！」

Yu did homage to the excellent words, and said, 'Yes.'

皋陶曰：「都！在知人，在安民。」

Gao-Yao continued, 'Oh! it lies in knowing men, and giving repose to the people.'

禹曰：「吁！咸若時，惟帝其難之。知人則哲，能官人安民則惠。黎民懷之，能哲而惠，何憂乎驩兜？何遷乎有苗？何畏乎巧言令色孔壬？」

Yu said, 'Alas! to attain to both these things might well be a difficulty even to the Di. When (the sovereign) knows men, he is wise, and can put every one into the office for which he is fit. When he gives repose to the people, his kindness is felt, and the black-haired race cherish him in their hearts. When he can be (thus) wise and kind, what occasion will he have for anxiety about a Huan-dou? what to be removing a lord of Miao? what to fear any one of fair words, insinuating appearance, and great artfulness?'

皋陶曰：「都！亦行有九德，亦言其人有德，乃言曰，載采采。」

Gao-Yao said, 'Oh! there are in all nine virtues to be discovered in conduct, and when we say that a man possesses (any) virtue, that is as much as to say he does such and such things.'

禹曰：「何？」

Yu asked, 'What (are the nine virtues)?'

皋陶曰：「寬而栗。柔而立，愿而恭，亂而敬，擾而毅，直而溫，簡而廉，剛而塞，彊而義，彰厥有常。吉哉！日宣三德，夙夜浚明有家。日嚴祗敬六德，亮采有邦，翕受敷施。九德咸事，俊乂在官。百僚師師，百工惟時。撫于五辰，庶績其凝。無教逸欲。有邦兢兢業業，一日二日萬幾。無曠庶官，天工人其代之。天敘有典，勑我五典五惇哉！天秩有禮，自我五禮有庸哉！同寅協恭和衷哉！天命有德，五服五章哉！天討有罪，五刑五用哉！政事懋哉懋哉！天聰明，自我民聰明，天明畏自我民明威。達于上下，敬哉有土。」

Gao-Yao replied, 'Affability combined with dignity; mildness combined with firmness; bluntness combined with respectfulness; aptness for government combined with reverent caution; docility combined with boldness; straightforwardness combined with gentleness; an easy negligence combined with discrimination; boldness combined with sincerity; and valour combined with righteousness. (When these qualities are) displayed, and that continuously, have we not the good (officer)? When there is a daily display of three (of these) virtues, their possessor could early and late regulate and brighten the clan (of which he was made chief). When there is a daily severe and reverent cultivation of six of them, their possessor could brilliantly conduct the affairs of the state (with which he was invested). When (such men) are all received and advanced, the possessors of those nine virtues will be employed in (the public) service. The men of a thousand and men of a hundred will be in their offices; the various ministers will emulate one another; all the officers will accomplish their duties at the proper times, observant of the five seasons (as the several elements predominate in them) - and thus their various duties will be fully accomplished. Let not (the Son of Heaven) set to the holders of states the example of indolence or dissoluteness. Let him be wary and fearful, (remembering that) in one day or two days there may occur ten thousand springs of things. Let him not have his various officers cumberers of their places. The work is Heaven's; men must act for it!
From Heaven are the (social) relationships with their several duties; we are charged with (the enforcement of) those five duties - and lo! we have the five courses of honourable conduct. From Heaven are the (social) distinctions with their several ceremonies; from us come the observances of those five ceremonies - and lo! they appear in regular practice. When (sovereign and ministers show) a common reverence and united respect for these, lo! the moral nature (of the people) is made harmonious. Heaven graciously distinguishes the virtuous - are there not the five habiliments, five decorations of them? Heaven punishes the guilty - are there not the five punishments, to be severally used for that purpose? The business of government! - ought we not to be earnest in it? ought we not to be earnest in it? Heaven hears and sees as our people hear and see; Heaven brightly approves and displays its terrors as our people brightly approve and would awe - such connexion is there between the upper and lower (worlds). How reverent ought the masters of territories to be!'

皋陶曰：「朕言惠，可厎行。」

Gao-Yao said, 'My words are in accordance with reason, and maybe put in practice.'

禹曰：「俞！乃言厎可績。」

Yu said, 'Yes, your words may be put in practice, and crowned with success.'

皋陶曰：「予未有知，思曰贊贊襄哉！」

Gao-Yao added, '(As to that) I do not know, but I wish daily to be helpful. May (the government) be perfected!'


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge