公曰：「嗟！我士！聽無嘩！予誓告汝群言之首。古人有言曰：『民訖自若，是多般。責人斯無難；惟受責俾如流，是惟艱哉。』我心之憂：日月逾邁，若弗圓來。

The duke said, 'Ah! my officers, listen to me without noise. I solemnly announce to you the most important of all sayings. (It is this which) the ancients have said, "Thus it is with all people, they mostly love their ease. In reproving others there is no difficulty, but to receive reproof, and allow it to have free course, this is difficult." The sorrow of my heart is, that the days and months have passed away, and it is not likely they will come again, (so that I might pursue a different course.)

惟古之謀人，則曰未就予忌；惟今之謀人，姑將以為親。雖則員然，尚繇詢茲黃髪，則罔所諐。番番良士，旅力既諐，我尚有之。仡仡勇夫，射御不違，我尚不欲。惟截截善諞言，俾君子易辭，我皇多有之！

'There were my old counsellors. I said, "They will not accommodate themselves to me," and I hated them. There were my new counsellors, and I would for the time give my confidence to them. So indeed it was with me; but hereafter I will take advice from the men of yellow hair, and then I shall be free from error. That good old officer! - his strength is exhausted, but I would rather have him (as my counsellor). That dashing brave officer! - his shooting and charioteering are faultless, but I would rather not wish to have him. As to men of quibbles, skilful at cunning words, and able to make the good man change his purposes, what have I to do to make much use of them?

昧昧我思之：如有一介臣，斷斷猗，無他伎；其心休休焉，其如有容。人之有伎，若己有之；人之彥聖，其心好之，不啻如自其口出，是能容之。以保我子孫黎民，亦職有利哉。人之有技，冒疾以惡之；人之彥聖，而違之，俾不達，是不能容。以不能保我子孫黎民，亦曰殆哉。

'I have deeply thought and concluded. Let me have but one resolute minister, plain and sincere, without other ability, but having a straightforward mind, and possessed of generosity, regarding the talents of others as if he himself possessed them; and when he finds accomplished and sage men, loving them in his heart more than his mouth expresses, really showing himself able to bear them: such a minister would be able to preserve my descendants and people, and would indeed be a giver of benefits. But if (the minister), when he finds men of ability, be jealous and hates them; if, when he finds accomplished and sage men, he oppose them and does not allow their advancement, showing himself really not able to bear them: such a man will not be able to protect my descendants and people; and will he not be a dangerous man?

邦之杌隉，曰由一人；邦之榮懷，亦尚一人之慶。」

'The decline and fall of a state may arise from one man. The glory and tranquillity of a state may also arise from the goodness of one man.'

本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge