虞舜側微。堯聞之聰明。將使嗣位。歷試諸難。作《舜典》。
曰若稽古帝舜，曰重華協于帝。濬哲文明，溫恭允塞，玄德升聞，乃命以位。

[p. 29] Examining into antiquity, we find that the emperor Shun was called Ch'ung-hwa. He corresponded to the former emperor ; was profound, wise, accomplished, and intelligent. He was mild and re- spectful, and entirely sincere. The report of his mysterious virtue was heard on high, and he was appointed to occupy the imperial Seat.

慎徽五典，五典克從；納于百揆，百揆時敘；賓于四門，四門穆穆；納于大麓，烈風雷雨弗迷。帝曰：「格！汝舜。詢事考言，乃言厎可績，三載。汝陟帝位。」舜讓于德，弗嗣。正月上日，受終于文祖。

(Shun) carefully set forth the beauty of the five cardinal duties, and they came to be (universally) observed. Being appointed to be General Regulator, the affairs of every (official) department were arranged in their proper seasons. (Being charged) to receive (the princes) from the four quarters of the land, they were all docilely submissive. Being sent to the great plains at the foot of the mountains, notwithstanding the tempests of wind, thunder, and rain, he did not go astray. The Di said, 'Come, you Shun. I have consulted you on (all) affairs, and examined your words, and found that they can be carried into practice - (now) for three years. Do you ascend the seat of the Di.' Shun wished to decline in favour of some one more virtuous, and not to consent to be (Yao's) successor. On the first day of the first month, (however), he received (Yao's) retirement (from his duties) in the temple of the Accomplished Ancestor.

在璿璣玉衡，以齊七政。肆類于上帝，禋于六宗，望于山川，徧于群神。輯五瑞。既月乃日，覲四岳群牧，班瑞于群后。

He examined the pearl-adorned turning sphere, with its transverse tube of jade, and reduced to a harmonious system (the movements of) the Seven Directors. Thereafter, he sacrificed specially, but with the ordinary forms, to God; sacrificed with reverent purity to the Six Honoured Ones; offered their appropriate sacrifices to the hills and rivers; and extended his worship to the host of spirits. He called in (all) the five jade-symbols of rank; and when the month was over, he gave daily audience to (the President of) the Four Mountains, and all the Pastors, (finally) returning their symbols to the various princes.

歲二月，東巡守，至于岱宗，柴。望秩于山川，肆覲東后。協時月正日，同律度量衡。修五禮、五玉、三帛、二生、一死贄。如五器，卒乃復。五月南巡守，至于南岳，如岱禮。八月西巡守，至于西岳，如初。十有一月朔巡守，至于北岳，如西禮。歸，格于藝祖，用特。五載一巡守，群后四朝。敷奏以言，明試以功，車服以庸。

He instituted the division (of the land) into twelve provinces, raising altars upon twelve hills in them. He (also) deepened the rivers.

肇十有二州，封十有二山，濬川。

He instituted the division (of the land) into twelve provinces, raising altars upon twelve hills in them. He (also) deepened the rivers.

象以典刑，流宥五刑，鞭作官刑，扑作教刑，金作贖刑。眚災肆赦，怙終賊刑。欽哉，欽哉，惟刑之恤哉！流共工于幽洲，放驩兜于崇山，竄三苗于三危，殛鯀于羽山，四罪而天下咸服。

He exhibited (to the people) the statutory punishments, enacting banishment as a mitigation of the five (great) inflictions; with the whip to be employed in the magistrates' courts, the stick to be employed in schools, and money to be received for redeemable offences. Inadvertent offences and those which could be ascribed to misfortune were to be pardoned, but those who transgressed presumptuously and repeatedly were to be punished with death. 'Let me be reverent! Let me be reverent!' (he said to himself.) 'Let compassion rule in punishment!' He banished the Minister of Works to You island; confined Huan-dou on mount Chong; drove (the chief of) San-miao (and his people) into San-wei, and kept them there; and held Gun a prisoner till death on mount Yu. These four criminals being thus dealt with, all under heaven acknowledged the justice (of Shun's administration).

二十有八載，帝乃殂落。百姓如喪考妣，三載，四海遏密八音。

After twenty-eight years the Di deceased, when the people mourned for him as for a parent for three years. Within the four seas all the eight kinds of instruments of music were stopped and hushed.

月正元日，舜格于文祖，詢于四岳，闢四門，明四目，達四聰。「咨，十有二牧！」曰，「食哉惟時！柔遠能邇，惇德允元，而難任人，蠻夷率服。」

On the first day of the first month (of the) next year, Shun went to (the temple of) the Accomplished Ancestor. He deliberated with (the President of) the Four Mountains how to throw open the doors (of communication between himself and the) four (quarters of the land), and how he could see with the eyes, and hear with the ears of all. He consulted with the twelve Pastors, and said to them, 'The food!--it depends on observing the seasons. Be kind to the distant, and cultivate the ability of the near. Give honour to the virtuous, and your confidence to the good, while you discountenance the artful - so shall the barbarous tribes lead on one another to make their submission.'

舜曰：「咨，四岳！有能奮庸熙帝之載，使宅百揆亮采，惠疇？」僉曰：「伯禹作司空。」帝曰：「俞，咨！禹，汝平水土，惟時懋哉！」禹拜稽首，讓于稷、契暨皋陶。帝曰：「俞，汝往哉！」

Shun said, 'Ho! (President of) the Four Mountains, is there any one who can with vigorous service attend to all the affairs of the Di, whom I may appoint to be General Regulator, to assist me in (all) affairs, managing each department according to its nature?' All (in the court) replied, 'There is Bo-Yu, the Minister of Works.' The Di said, 'Yes. Ho! Yu, you have regulated the water and the land. In this (new office) exert yourself.' Yu did obeisance with his head to the ground, and wished to decline in favour of the Minister of Agriculture, or Xie, or Gao-Yao. The Di said, 'Yes, but do you go (and undertake the duties).'

帝曰：「棄，黎民阻飢，汝后稷，播時百穀。」

The Di said, 'Qi, the black-haired people are (still) suffering from famine. Do you, O prince, as Minister of Agriculture, (continue to) sow (for them) the various kinds of grain.'

帝曰：「契，百姓不親，五品不遜。汝作司徒，敬敷五教，在寬。」

The Di said, 'Xie, the people are (still) wanting in affection for one another, and do not docilely, observe the five orders of relationship. It is yours, as the Minister of Instruction, reverently, to set forth the lessons of duty belonging to those five orders. Do so with gentleness.'

帝曰：「皋陶，蠻夷猾夏，寇賊姦宄。汝作士，五刑有服，五服三就。五流有宅，五宅三居。惟明克允！」

The Di said, 'Gao-Yao, the barbarous tribes trouble our great land. There are (also) robbers, murderers, insurgents, and traitors. It is yours, as the Minister of Crime, to use the five punishments to deal with their offences. For the infliction of these there are the three appointed places. There are the five cases in which banishment in the appropriate places is to be resorted to, to which places, though five, three localities are assigned. Perform your duties with intelligence, and you will secure a sincere (submission).'

帝曰：「疇若予工？」僉曰：「垂哉！」帝曰：「俞，咨！垂，汝共工。」垂拜稽首，讓于殳斨暨伯與。」帝曰：「俞，往哉！汝諧。」

The Di said, 'Who can superintend my works, as they severally require?' All (in the court) replied, 'Is there not Chui?' The Di said, 'Yes. Ho! Chui, you must be Minister of Works.' Chui did obeisance with his head to the ground, and wished to decline in favour of Shu, Qiang, or Bo-Yu. The Di said, 'Yes, but do you go (and undertake the duties). Effect a harmony (in all the departments).'

帝曰：「疇若予上下草木鳥獸？」僉曰：「益哉！」帝曰：「俞，咨！益，汝作朕虞。」益拜稽首，讓于朱虎、熊羆。帝曰：「俞，往哉！汝諧。」

The Di said, 'Who can superintend, as the nature of the charge requires, the grass and trees, with the birds and beasts on my hills and in my marshes?' All (in the court) replied, 'Is there not Yi?' The Di said, 'Yes. Ho! Yi do you be my Forester.' Yi did obeisance with his head to the ground, and wished to decline in favour of Zhu, Hu, Xiong, or Pi. The Di said, 'Yes, but do you go (and undertake the duties). You must manage them harmoniously.'

帝曰：「咨！四岳，有能典朕三禮？」僉曰：「伯夷！」帝曰：「俞，咨！伯，汝作秩宗。夙夜惟寅，直哉惟清。」伯拜稽首，讓于夔、龍。帝曰：「俞，往，欽哉！」

The Di said, 'Ho! (President of the) Four Mountains, is there any one able to direct my three (religious) ceremonies?' All (In the court) answered, 'Is there not Bo-yi?' The Di said, 'Yes. Ho! Bo, you must be the Arranger in the Ancestral Temple. Morning and night be reverent. Be upright, be pure.' Bo did obeisance with his head to the ground, and wished to decline in favour of Kui or Long. The Di said, 'Yes, but do you go (and undertake the duties). Be reverential!'

帝曰：「夔！命汝典樂，教冑子，直而溫，寬而栗，剛而無虐，簡而無傲。詩言志，歌永言，聲依永，律和聲。八音克諧，無相奪倫，神人以和。」夔曰：「於！予擊石拊石，百獸率舞。」

The Di said, 'Kui, I appoint you to be Director of Music, and to teach our sons, so that the straightforward shall yet be mild; the gentle, dignified: the strong, not tyrannical: and the impetuous, not arrogant. Poetry is the expression of earnest thought; singing is the prolonged utterance of that expression; the notes accompany that utterance, and they are harmonized themselves by the standard tubes. (In this way) the eight different kinds of musical instruments can be adjusted so that one shall not take from or interfere with another; and spirits and men are brought into harmony.' Kui said, 'I smite the (sounding-) stone, I gently strike it, and the various animals lead on one another to dance.'

帝曰：「龍，朕堲讒說殄行，震驚朕師。命汝作納言，夙夜出納朕命，惟允！」

The Di said, 'Long, I abominate slanderous speakers and destroyers of the (right) ways, who agitate and alarm my people. I appoint you to be the Minister of Communication. Early and late give forth my orders and report to me, seeing that everything is true.'

帝曰：「咨！汝二十有二人，欽哉！惟時亮天功。」

The Di said, 'Ho! you, twenty and two men, be reverent; so shall you be helpful to the business (entrusted to me by) Heaven.'

三載考績，三考，黜陟幽明，庶績咸熙。分北三苗。

Every three years there was an examination of merits, and after three examinations the undeserving were degraded, and the deserving advanced. (By this arrangement) the duties of all the departments were fully discharged; the (people of) San-miao (also) were discriminated and separated.

舜生三十徵庸三十，在位五十載，陟方乃死。

In the thirtieth year of his age, Shun was called to employment. Thirty years he was on the throne (with Yao). Fifty years afterwards he went on high and died.

帝釐下土，方設居方，別生分類。作《汨作》、《九共》九篇、《槀飫》。


本作品在全世界都属于公有领域，因为作者逝世已经超过100年，并且于1923年1月1日之前出版。
English translation: James Legge