紅樓夢　清
輯者：程偉元
曹雪芹（前八十回）；高鶚（後四十回

Table of Contents as partially translated by Franz Kuhn, 1958 and page numbers.

第一回　　　甄士隱夢幻識通靈　賈雨村風塵懷閨秀
CHAPTER 1: Shih Ying is carried away in a dream and receives a 
revelation. Amidst the toil and welter of daily life Yu Tsun finds 
the maiden of his heart. 

第二回　　　賈夫人仙逝揚州城　冷子興演說榮國府
CHAPTER 2 : In Yangchow a high-born lady joins the company of the 
Blessed. In the tavern Yu Tsun learns more about his noble 
relatives. 13 

第三回　　　金陵城起複賈雨村　榮國府收養林黛玉
CHAPTER 3 : Mr. Ling gives his guest from the West an introduction 
to the Yungkuo palace. The Princess Ancestress takes a motherless -~ " 
child lovingly into her home. 20 

第四回　　　薄命女偏逢薄命郎　葫蘆僧亂判葫蘆案
CHAPTER 4: An unfortunate girl finds an unfortunate suitor. A little 
bonze from the Temple of the Gourd acts as judge. 34

第五回　　　開生面夢演紅樓夢　立新場情傳幻境情
CHAPTER 5: The spirit of Pao Yu ivanders about in the Phantom 
Realm of the Great Void. The Fairy of Fearful Awakening vainly 
interprets for him in songs the Dream of the Red Chamber. 43

第六回　　　賈寶玉初試雨雲情　劉姥姥一進榮國府
CHAPTER 6: Pao Yu tries for the first time the "Play of Cloud and 
Rain." In the Ningkuo palace he becomes acquainted with his 
nephew Chin Chung. 52 

第七回　　　送宮花周瑞嘆英蓮　談肄業秦鐘結寶玉
CHAPTER 7 : Pao Yu is shown the gold amulet of his girl cousin. The 
girl cousin is shown Pao Yu's stone. 58 

第八回　　　薛寶釵小恙梨香院　賈寶玉大醉絳芸軒
CHAPTER 8: Chia Cheng reprimands his delinquent offspring. Ill- 
behaved boys create a disturbance in the school. 65

第九回　　　戀風流情友入家塾　起嫌疑頑童鬧學堂
CHAPTER 9: The Prince Hermit's birthday is celebrated in the N'ng- 
kuo palace. The sight of Phoenix awakens carnal desires in the 
heart of Chia Jui. 74 

第十回　　　金寡婦貪利權受辱　張太醫論病細窮源
CHAPTER 10: Phoenix maliciously incites an unrequited passion. In 
spite of warnings, Chia Jui looks into the forbidden side of the 
Wind and Moon Mirror. 84

第十一回　　慶壽辰寧府排家宴　見熙鳳賈瑞起淫心
CHAPTER 11 : Ko Ching dies and receives the posthumous title of wife 
of a mandarin of the fifth rank. Phoenix takes over the household 
management in the Ningkuo palace. 93

第十二回　　王熙鳳毒設相思局　賈天祥正照風月鑒
CHAPTER 12: Pao Yu meets the Prince of the Northern Quietness on 
the road. Chin Chung enjoys himself in the nunnery. 101

第十三回　　秦可卿死封龍禁尉　王熙鳳協理寧國府
CHAPTER 13 : Beginning of Spring is exalted by Imperial favor and 
chosen to be Mistress of the Phoenix Palace, Chin Chung sets out 
prematurely on kis journey to the Yellow Springs. 114

第十四回　　林如海捐館揚州城　賈寶玉路謁北靜王
CHAPTER 14: Pao Yu reveals his talent in the Park of Delightful Vi- 
sion. Black Jade is annoyed by the bite of a fly. 123

第十五回　　王鳳姐弄權鐵檻寺　秦鯨卿得趣饅頭庵
CHAPTER 15 : On 'the day of the Lantern Festival the Imperial consort 
pays her family a visit. 134

第十六回　　賈元春才選鳳藻宮　秦鯨卿夭逝黃泉路
CHAPTER 16: -One night the maid Pearl tests Pao Yu's feelings and 
stipulates her conditions. Black Jade makes fun of Cousin Little 
Cloud. 144

第十七回　　會芳園試才題對額　賈寶玉機敏動諸賓
CHAPTER 17: The maid Pearl sulks and takes Pao Yu quietly to task. 
The maid Little Ping keeps silence and saves Chia Lien from being 
discovered. 154 

第十八回　　林黛玉誤剪香囊袋　賈元春歸省慶元宵
CHAPTER 18: Pao Yu falls out with two of his cousins at the same 
time. Two lovers tease one another with quotations from "The Play 
of the Western Pavilion." 166

第十九回　　情切切良宵花解語　意綿綿靜日玉生香
CHAPTER 19: Ni the usurer proves impulsively generous when drunk. 
A lovelorn maid gets queer ideas about a lost handkerchief. 177

第二十回　　王熙鳳正言彈妒意　林黛玉俏語謔嬌音
CHAPTER 20: A sorcerer bewitches the cousins. The marvellous power 
of the magic stone brings about their recovery. 188

第二十一回　賢襲人嬌嗔箴寶玉　俏平兒軟語救賈璉
CHAPTER 21: On the Wasp Waist Bridge a lovelorn maid expresses 
her feelings in commonplace words. The "Courtesan Yang" startles 
two butterflies in the Pavilion of the Kingfisher-Blue Drops. 200

第二十二回　聽曲文寶玉悟禪機　製燈迷賈政悲讖語
CHAPTER 22 : The better off one is, the more one troubles about one's 
welfare. The more a woman is cherished and loved, the more love 
does she demand. 214

第二十三回　西廂記妙詞通戲語　牡丹亭艷曲警芳心
CHAPTER 23: A lost unicorn amulet causes Little Cloud to expose her 
bare i ad to the fierce sun. Gold Ring cannot get over the insult she 
suffers and seeks the death of honor. 228

第二十四回　醉金剛輕財尚義俠　痴女兒遺帕惹相思
CHAPTER 24: The degenerate offspring experiences the pain of a 
paternal flogging. 238

第二十五回　魘魔法姊弟逢五鬼　紅樓夢通靈遇雙真
CHAPTER 25: The Begonia Club meets in the Hermitage of Clear 
Autumn Weather. The Princess Ancestress entertains the god- 
mother from the country in the Park of Delightful Vision. 245

第二十六回　蘅蕪院設言傳密語　瀟湘館春困發幽情
CHAPTER 26: Pao Yu sets out to burn incense in the dust of the high- 
way in memory of a dear departed. On the Day of the Thousand 
Autumns Phoenix unexpectedly turns into a vinegar barrel. 264 

第二十七回　滴翠亭楊妃戲彩蝶　埋香塚飛燕泣殘紅
CHAPTER 27: The windy and rainy mood of a gloomy autumn eve- 
ning inspires Black Jade with an elegy on the wind and the rain. 
The maid Mandarin Duck renounces the bliss of a Mandarin Duck 
union. 27

第二十八回　蔣玉菡情贈茜香羅　薛寶釵羞籠紅麝串
CHAPTER 28: The Mad Robber Count has improper designs and ex- 
periences a flogging. The Cold Knight sets off on a journey to avoid 
trouble. 294

第二十九回　享福人福深還禱福　痴情女情重愈斟情
CHAPTER 29: The libertine, shamed and disgraced, seeks distraction 
in a business expedition. A superior girl practices the art of poetry, 
studying the best masters. 302

第三十回　　寶釵借扇機帶雙敲　齡官劃薔痴及局外
CHAPTER 30: A quack doctor treats Bright Cloud with *' 'tiger and 
wolf medicines" Despite being ill, Bright Cloud heroically sacri- 
fices herself for Pao Yu and mends his peacock-plume cloak. 311

第三十一回　撕扇子作千金一笑　因麒麟伏白首雙星
CHAPTER 31 : The waiting maid Cuckoo slyly tests Pao Yu's feelings 
and upsets his mental balance by hinting at a parting. A kindly 
aunt pacifies a lovelorn maiden with gentle words. 326

第三十二回　訴肺腑心迷活寶玉　含耻辱情烈死金釧
CHAPTER 32: Chia Lien secretly takes the second Miss Yu to wife. 
The third Miss Yu aspires to the hand of the Cold Knight. 342

第三十三回　手足耽耽小動唇舌　不肖種種大承笞撻
CHAPTER 33: A fiery maiden, ashamed of her unrequited passion, 
takes her life. The Cold Knight strides with a cold heart through 
the Gateway of the Great Void. 356

第三十四回　情中情因情感妹妹　錯裡錯以錯勸哥哥
CHAPTER 34: Phoenix cross-examines the servant and so finds out the 
master's deceits. The unhappy Yu girl allows herself to be lured 
into a trap. 366

第三十五回　白玉釧親嚐蓮葉羹　黃金鶯巧結梅花絡
CHAPTER 35: Phoenix, with cunning and malice, plays the young 
rival off against the older one. Driven to desperation, the second 
Yu kills herself by swallowing gold. 382

第三十六回　綉鴛鴦夢兆絳芸軒　識分定情悟梨香院
CHAPTER 36: The bag with the springlike embroidery becomes a 
traitor in the hands of a simple girl. The girls in the Park of De- 
lightful Vision fall into discredit and have to suffer the torture of a 
house search. 393

第三十七回　秋爽齋偶結海棠社　蘅蕪苑夜擬菊花題
CHAPTER 37: A sinister occurrence at the nocturnal banquet awakens 
'.Inrh forebodings. At the Mid-AutWfl-n Festival a new stanza awak- 
ens happy promises for the future. 411

第三十八回　林瀟湘魁奪菊花詩　薛蘅蕪諷和螃蟹詠
CHAPTER 38: The charming maid cannot get over the wrong done 
her, and dies in the flower of her youth. The unhappy scion of 
princes dedicates a funeral hymn to the dead maid. 422

第三十九回　村老嫗荒談承色笑　癡情子實意覓蹤跡
CHAPTER 39: The Plaster Priest makes game of Pao Yu and invents a 
remedy for jealousy. Four beauties question fate with the fishing 
rod. 431

第四十回　　史太君兩宴大觀園　金鴛鴦三宣牙牌令
CHAPTER 40: An evil dream frightens an unhappy lovesick maiden 
in the Bamboo Hermitage. Beginning of Spring is visited by her 
relatives on her sickbed in the Imperial Palace. 441

第四十一回　賈寶玉品茶攏翠庵　劉姥姥醉臥怡紅院
CHAPTER 41 : The beautiful saint is caught up in the fire of sin as she 
sits on her prayer cushion, and is carried away into ecstasy by 
demoniacal forces. Black Jade is frightened by the shadow of the 
snake in the beaker, and rejects all nourishment with sublime 
resolution. 452

第四十二回　蘅蕪君蘭言解疑語　瀟湘子雅謔補餘香
CHAPTER 42: The Ancestress puts a reverse interpretation upon the 
evil omen of the begonia blossoming in winter and tries to drown 
anxious doubts in the joyous tumult of a banquet. Pao Yu loses the 
spirit stone and forfeits his reason as a consequence. 463

第四十三回　閒取樂偶攢金慶壽　不了情暫撮土爲香
CHAPTER 43: Black Jade consigns her poetical works to the flames 
and finally renounces her unhappy love. Precious Clasp crosses the 
threshold of her maidenly bower for the last time, and goes through 
the great ceremony of her life. 480

第四十四回　變生不測鳳姐潑醋　喜出望外平兒理妝
CHAPTER 44: The plant Purple Pearl returns to the Sphere of Ban- 
ished Suffering. The spirit stone drenches with tears the place of 
dear memories. 500

第四十五回　金蘭契互剖金蘭語　風雨夕悶製風雨詞
CHAPTER 45: Taste of Spring marries far from home, and Pao Yu 
weeps bitter tears after her. Ghosts disport themselves at night in 
, the deserted park. 507

第四十六回　尷尬人難免尷尬事　鴛鴦女誓絕鴛鴦偶
CHAPTER 46: Yu Tsun recognizes in the mysterious hermit his old 
friend and benefactor. The moneylender Ni, known as the Drunken 
Diamond, becomes the pike in the carp pond. 516

第四十七回　獃霸王調情遭苦打　冷郎君懼禍走他鄉
CHAPTER 47 : The unhappy lover, Pao Yu, stirs up past feelings. The 
bailiffs of the Minister of Finance take possession of the western 
palace. 529

第四十八回　濫情人情誤思游藝　慕雅女雅集苦吟詩
CHAPTER 48: The Princess Ancestress, prostrate before heaven, nobly 
takes upon her own head the guilt of the whole clan, and generously 
distributes her treasures. The Imperial grace is showered upon 
Chia Cheng, and the princely title, restored once more, is passed 
on to him. 541

第四十九回　琉璃世界白雪紅梅　脂粉香娃割腥啖膻
CHAPTER 49: Robbers loot the property left by the Ancestress and 
abduct the beautiful anchoress. Pao Yu gets back his stone and is 
awakened. 550

第五十回　　蘆雪广爭聯即景詩　暖香塢創製春燈謎
CHAPTER 50: Pao Yu passes the examination with honors and re- 
nounces the red dust of the world. Shih Ying and Yu Tsun meet 
once more and conclude the story of the stone. 569

第五十一回　薛小妹新編懷古詩　胡庸醫亂用虎狼藥
第五十二回　俏平兒情掩蝦須鐲　勇晴雯病補雀金裘
第五十三回　寧國府除夕祭宗祠　榮國府元宵開夜宴
第五十四回　史太君破陳腐舊套　王熙鳳效戲彩斑衣
第五十五回　辱親女愚妾爭閒氣　欺幼主刁奴蓄險心
第五十六回　敏探春興利除宿弊　識寶釵小惠全大体
第五十七回　慧紫鵑情辭試忙玉　慈姨媽愛語慰痴顰
第五十八回　杏子陰假鳳泣虛凰　茜紗窗真情揆痴理
第五十九回　柳葉渚邊嗔鶯咤燕　絳芸軒裡召將飛符
第六十回　　茉莉粉替去薔薇硝　玫瑰露引來茯苓霜
第六十一回　投鼠忌器寶玉情贜　判冤决獄平兒情權
第六十二回　憨湘雲醉眠芍藥裀　獃香菱情解柘榴裙
第六十三回　壽怡紅群芳開夜宴　死金丹獨艷理親喪
第六十四回　幽淑女悲題五美吟　浪蕩子情遺九龍珮
第六十五回　賈二舍偷娶尤二姨　尤三姐思嫁柳二郎
第六十六回　情小妹耻情歸地府　冷二郎一冷入空門
第六十七回　饋土物顰卿念故里　訊家童鳳姐蓄陰謀
第六十八回　苦尤娘賺入大觀園　酸鳳姐大鬧寧國府
第六十九回　弄小巧用借劍殺人　覺大限吞生金自逝
第七十回　　林黛玉重建桃花社　史湘雲偶填柳絮詞
第七十一回　嫌隙人有心生嫌隙　鴛鴦女無意遇鴛鴦
第七十二回　王熙鳳恃強羞說病　來旺婦倚勢霸成親
第七十三回　痴丫頭誤拾綉春囊　懦小姐不問累金鳳
第七十四回　惑奸讒抄揀大觀園　矢孤介杜絕寧國府
第七十五回　開夜宴异兆發悲音　賞中秋新詞得佳讖
第七十六回　凸碧堂品笛感凄清　凹晶館聯詩悲寂寞
第七十七回　俏丫鬟抱屈夭風流　美優伶斬情歸水月
第七十八回　老學士閒徵姽嫿詞　痴公子杜撰芙蓉誄
第七十九回　薛文龍悔娶河東獅　賈迎春誤嫁中山狼
第八十回　　懦弱迎春腸回九曲　姣怯香菱病入膏肓
第八十一回　占旺相四美釣游魚　奉嚴詞兩番入家塾
第八十二回　老學究講義警頑心　病瀟湘痴魂驚惡夢
第八十三回　省宮闈賈元妃染恙　鬧閨閫薛寶釵吞聲
第八十四回　試文字寶玉始提親　探驚風賈環重結怨
第八十五回　賈存周報升郎中任　薛文起復惹放流刑
第八十六回　受私賄老官翻案牘　寄閒情淑女解琴書
第八十七回　感深秋撫琴悲往事　坐禪寂走火入邪魔
第八十八回　博庭歡寶玉贊孤兒　正家法賈珍鞭悍僕
第八十九回　人亡物在公子填詞　蛇影杯弓顰卿絕粒
第九十回　　失綿衣貧女耐嗷嘈　送果品小郎驚叵測
第九十一回　縱淫心寶蟾工設計　布疑陣寶玉妄談禪
第九十二回　評女傳巧姐慕賢良　玩母珠賈政參聚散
第九十三回　甄家僕投靠賈家門　水月庵掀翻風月案
第九十四回　宴海棠賈母賞花妖　失寶玉通靈知奇禍
第九十五回　因訛成實元妃薨逝　以假混真寶玉瘋顛
第九十六回　瞞消息鳳姐設奇謀　泄机關顰兒迷本性
第九十七回　林黛玉焚稿斷痴情　薛寶釵出閨成大禮
第九十八回　苦絳珠魂歸離恨天　病神瑛淚灑相思地
第九十九回　守官箴惡奴同破例　閱邸報老舅自擔驚
第一百回　　破好事香菱結深恨　悲遠嫁寶玉感離情
第百零一回　大觀園月夜感幽魂　散花寺神簽驚异兆
第百零二回　寧國府骨肉病災襟　大觀園符水驅妖孽
第百零三回　施毒計金桂自焚身　昧真禪雨村空遇舊
第百零四回　醉金剛小鰍生大浪　痴公子餘痛觸前情
第百零五回　錦衣軍查抄寧國府　驄馬使彈劾平安州
第百零六回　王熙鳳致禍抱羞慚　賈太君禱天消禍患
第百零七回　散餘資賈母明大義　复世職政老沐天恩
第百零八回　強歡笑蘅蕪慶生辰　死纏綿瀟湘聞鬼哭
第百零九回　候芳魂五兒承錯愛　還孽債迎女返真元
第百一十回　史太君壽終歸地府　王鳳姐力詘失人心
第百十一回　鴛鴦女殉主登太虛　狗彘奴欺天招伙盜
第百十二回　活冤孽妙尼遭大劫　死讎仇趙妾赴冥曹
第百十三回　忏宿冤鳳姐托村嫗　釋舊憾情婢感痴郎
第百十四回　王熙鳳歷幻返金陵　甄應嘉蒙恩還玉闕
第百十五回　惑偏私惜春矢素志　證同類寶玉失相知
第百十六回　得通靈幻境悟仙緣　送慈柩故鄉全孝道
第百十七回　阻超凡佳人雙護玉　欣聚党惡子獨承家
第百十八回　記微嫌舅兄欺弱女　驚謎語妻妾諫痴人
第百十九回　中鄉魁寶玉卻塵緣　沐皇恩賈家延世澤
第百二十回　甄士隱詳說太虛情　賈雨村歸結紅樓夢
